Comparable Leaders? Pancho & Che Francisco "Pancho" Villa (1878-1923) Pancho Villa was a celebrated Mexican general, revolutionary leader, and bandit. Beloved by the masses, he became widely known for his fierce fighting and dramatic escapes. He was born Doroteo, Arango on June 5, 1878, in Rio Grande, Mexico. He adopted the name of the outlaw Francisco Villa after he killed the owner of an estate for betraying his sister - the original Villa had committed the same act. For this, Villa was forced to escape into the mountains. He spent his teen years as a fugitive, robbing trains, looting banks, and raiding mines. Later, he would use these skills as a successful guerrilla fighter. In 1910 the Mexican people rose up against the dictatorship of Porfirio Díaz. Villa joined Francisco Madero, leader of the rebel forces, who had seized control of the Mexican government. Villa fought with great courage and was celebrated for his bravery. With his troops, Villa conquered many enemy strongholds, including Chihuahua, Parral, and Torreon. However, in 1912 General Victoiano Huerta, suspicious of Villa's loyalties, condemned Villa to death. Madero intervened and sent Villa to prison instead. Four months later Villa escaped to EI Paso, Texas. The following year, Madero was assassinated and Huerta seized control of Mexico. Villa returned to Mexico and formed a new army, the famous Division del Norte (Division of the North). Fighting side by side with the forces of Venustiano Carranza, Villa crushed Huerta's dictatorship. In recognition of his leadership, Villa became the governor of the state of Chihuahua soon after. However, conflicts arose between Villa and Carranza, and Villa and fellow revolutionary Emiliano Zapata were forced to escape. Villa continued to fight, but he lost the crucial Battle of Celaya in 1915. The country's allegiance shifted to Carranza, who received United States backing. In reprisal for this shift in United States support, Villa killed 15 or 16 American citizens· in the Santa Isabel massacre in 1916. A year later, Villa killed 17 Americans in New Mexico as a further protest against United States actions. President Woodrow Wilson sent an American force to apprehend Villa. Although Villa was able to elude capture, many of his supporters were killed. At last, only Villa and three faithful men survived. For his valiant stand against the American troops, Villa became a hero and widely popular in Mexico. In 1920 the Mexican government retired Villa with full pay at the rank of general. Three years later, he was ambushed and assassinated by a group of his enemies. Were you surprised that the Mexican government rewarded Villa with a title and pension rather than having him imprisoned or put to death? Explain your answer. Ernesto "Che" Guevara (1928-1967) I believe in the armed struggle as the only solution for those peoples who fight to free themselves, and I am consistent with my beliefs. Many may call me an adventurer, and that I am only one of a different kind - one of those who risks his skin to prove his beliefs. ~Ernesto "Che" Guevara in a letter to his parents, 1965 Ernesto "Che" Guevara was a revolutionary leader who tried to spread communism throughout Latin America. He played a major role in the overthrow of the Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista and helped establish Fidel Castro's government in 1959. Born in Argentina, Ernesto Guevara Serna was the oldest of five children. He took the nickname "Che" in 1959 when he became an honorary Cuban citizen. To relieve his severe asthma, his parents moved the family to the mountain town of Alta Gracia from eastern Argentina. Guevara had a wild childhood, running with street gangs, working in the vineyards, and handling firearms. Guevara's mother was a revolutionary, and he was profoundly influenced by his mother's ideology. When he was 14, Guevara demonstrated against the Argentine dictator Juan Perón. After his grandmother's death from cancer, Guevara decided to become a doctor. When he was 25 years old, Guevara graduated with a degree in medicine and surgery from the University of Buenos Aires. To avoid having to serve in Perón's army, Guevara left Argentina. He worked with leftist causes throughout Latin America. In the mid~1950s, Guevara traveled to Cuba to support Fidel Castro's revolution. He served as physician and chief of personnel for Castro's expeditionary force. In 1956 Castro set up a guerrilla base in the countryside. There Guevara trained the men in tactics and weapons. He also set up a weapons plant, bakery, and shoe shop. In January 1959, when Castro seized the Cuban government, Guevara commanded La Cabana fortress in the Havana harbor. Soon after he became Castro's top economic adviser. In this position, he established a treaty between Cuba and the Soviet Union whereby Cuba traded sugar for Soviet oil and machinery. In 1961 Guevara was appointed head of the Cuban Ministry of Industry, which oversaw the petroleum, sugar, and mining industries. However, as economic conditions got worse in Cuba, Guevara's power declined. Five years later, he established a Cubanbacked guerrilla base in Bolivia, which was not supported by the Bolivian peasants. On October 9, 1967, the Bolivian army captured and executed Guevara