In the years since the farm workers movement of the 1960s, life for the men and women who toil on the nation's large farms has become one of hardship and despair-and the victories won by Cesar Chavez and others but a distant a memory. According to the Federal Commission on Agricultural Workers, the number of farm laborers rose from about 1.8 million to 2.5 million between 1960 and 1998. While once composed mainly of U.S. citizens, this workforce is now made up primarily of immigrants from Mexico and Central America. The increase in the migrant worker population countered the predictions made by agricultural experts in the 1960s-that most crops eventually would be picked mechanically and that the migrant worker would become obsolete. The belief was that machines would be cheaper than farm workers whose numerous labor gains during the 1960s and early 1970s had made them too costly to employers. However, during the 1970s, many of the advances made on behalf of farm workers were rolled back. In California, for example, a string of pro-business governors relaxed the enforcement of the state's tough labor laws. Growers responded by firing farm workers who were union members and eliminating such hardwon benefits as sick leave, vacation pay, and health insurance. The use of migrant workers thus became so cheap that many of the machines developed for picking various fruits and vegetables never saw any use. One of the main reasons that farm labor has become so inexpensive is that many of the workers-about 40%- are illegal immigrants, who lack both the means and desire to protest their poor working conditions. "Employers avoid incredible hassles by bringing in [illegal] immigrants," notes one expert on the topic. "They can get immigrants to work terribly hard under supervision that Americans would resent or resist." While the country's more than 2 million migrant workers perform jobs that few Americans want and help fuel the nation's agricultural economy in the process--they are by no means well compensated. Farm laborers are the lowest paid and least protected workers in America. Despite the establishment of a minimum wage in 1938, agricultural workers were not covered by the wage minimum until 1966 – and even then it was set lower than that of other workers. During the mid-1990s, the average migrant worker earned only about $5,000. In addition to the other benefits they are denied, many farm workers lack adequate housing. In 1998, about 800,000 workers had no adequate shelter, according to the Housing Assistance Council, a Washington, D.C.-based organization that studies rural housing. These workers were forced to sleep in such places as trailers, garages, and even outside in parks or forest preserves. In 1998, the federal government spent $27.5 million to help provide more housing for farm laborers-far less than the $69 million spent in 1979. Nearly forty years after the future looked so bright for farm workers, most are now trapped in a life of poverty and poor working conditions-even as they play what many would acknowledge is a significant role in the nation's farming economy. Inflation Eats Away at the Dollar During the 1970s, prices went up. This inflation had begun in the late 1960s, when spending by the federal government rose. Great Society programs and the war in Vietnam were expensive. President Johnson did not want to anger voters by raising taxes. As a result, the government had to borrow the money. This borrowing put more money into the economy. At the same time, the economy slumped. Businesses were producing less and less. The combination of more money and fewer goods pushed prices up. In the middle 1970s, inflation rose even more sharply. Rising oil prices sent inflation soaring more than ten percent a year.