Cuba's historical development has been deeply affected by its location. Cuba is an island, lying astride a network of vital sealines that feed the rich Caribbean basin, extending from Florida to Guyana. Columbus discovered modern-day Cuba on his first voyage (1492) and it soon became a staging ground for the Spaniards' many expeditions to the Mexican and North American mainland. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the island did not command much imperial attention, but its commercial and strategic importance grew in the eighteenth century with the expansion of the regular fleets between Spain and her American colonies. The indigenous population, descended from immigrants from the Greater Antilles and the Bahamas, scarcely survived the first century of the Spanish colonization. Here, as elsewhere in Latin America, the European conquerors turned to black Africa for their labor supply. As a result, Cuba became a multiracial society: by the twentieth century, according to one estimate, the population was 40 percent black, 30 percent white, and 30 percent mixed (including Oriental and Indian). Cuba's economy languished under the rigid mercantilist policies of the Spanish crown until the reforms of Charles III (1759-88) provided the stimuli that led to growth. The nineteenth century saw Cuba burst forth as an agricultural phenomenon. A brief coffee boom gave way to the cultivation of tobacco, which became a major crop by midcentury-a position it still holds, as Cuban cigars (puros) continue to be regarded as among the finest in the world. But the most important source of wealth, the one that would shape the contours of Cuban society and history, was another product: cane sugar. Emphasis on sugar began in the eighteenth century and continued over time. By 1860 Cuba was producing nearly a third (500,000 tons) of the world's entire sugar supply. The human power to fuel this boom continued to come from the nightmarish slave trade which delivered more than 600,000 Africans in chains to Cuba between 1800 and 1865. Slavery itself lasted until 1886, longer than anywhere else in the Americas save Brazil. Cuba's economic development has thus been typical of tropical America: a monocultural, slave-based, export-oriented agricultural society. In another respect, however, it was atypical. When Cuba was less than a decade away from the twentieth century it was still a colony. An earlier independence effort had failed in the bitter "Ten Years War" (1868-78), when the nationalist Cubans-those who rose against the Spanish-failed to rally the elite and were slowly ground down by Spanish troops. Spain's continued political control of the island was becoming anachronistic, however, since by the 1880s Cuba's trade and investment was almost exclusively with the U.S. The U.S. economic interest in Cuba led to numerous offers to purchase the island country. The Spanish invariably refused, but some prominent Cubans strongly favored annexation by the U.S. Meanwhile, Cuba was drawn ever closer into the U.S. orbit. A handful of Cuban nationalists who had never accepted their defeat in 1878 fled into exile and plotted a new rebellion. The most famous was Jose Marti, an eloquent revolutionary poet-lawyer whose long exile in New York produced Cuba's most memorable antiAmerican rhetoric. A new revolt for independence broke out in 1895. Cuba was soon engulfed in another savage war, with rebels and Spanish forces both resorting to scorched earth tactics. The war dragged on for three years. The Spanish resorted to brutal methods, such as the use of concentration camps, to liquidate the guerrilla-style patriots. Given its huge economic stake in Cuba, the U.S. was unlikely to remain out of the struggle. The U.S. public was excited by sensationalist press accounts of Spanish brutality, and business and religious leaders demanded U.S. recognition of the rebels. The expansionist urge in the U.S. was fed both by those who stood to gain economically and by those who preached of a U.S. mission to rescue the Cubans from Spanish misrule. Although President McKinley resisted pressure to intervene, events overtook him. In April 1898, the USS Maine mysteriously exploded in Havana harbor. The blast, which has never been satisfactorily explained, swept away the last vestiges of anti-war sentiment, and Congress promptly declared war on Spain. The "splendid little war" (as Teddy Roosevelt called it) lasted only seven months. The ill-equipped Spaniards went down to humiliating defeat. They had little choice but to grant Cuba independence in December 1898. Dubious Independence Cuba began her new status under U.S. military occupation, hardly favorable for developing a healthy sense of national identity. The U.S. authorities immediately disbanded the rebel army, thus removing the only potential source of armed opposition to U.S. rule. The occupation was a textbook example of what was regarded as "enlightened" intervention. The North Americans built badly needed schools, roads, sewers, and telegraph lines. But it was all in service of integrating the now "civilized" Cubans more closely into the U.S. orbit. U.S. government leaders saw nothing contradictory in their presiding over Cuba's emergence as an independent nation. They saw economic, moral, and political responsibilities all going hand in hand. The Cubans were allowed, even encouraged, to choose a constitutional convention which produced a charter in 1901. But the U.S. government harbored doubts about the new country's ability to govern itself, so the U.S. forced the Cubans, under protest, to incorporate an amendment (the "Platt Amendment") which gave the U.S. the right to oversee the Cuban economy, veto international commitments, and intervene in domestic politics at Washington's discretion. This proviso remained in force until 1934, making Cuba an American protectorate. Cuba's first president, Tomas Estrada Palma (1902- 6), favored outright annexation by the U.S. He was typical of much of the Cuban elite which saw little advantage, and certainly no future, for an independent Cuba. Their willingness to embrace the Yankee encroachment aroused the bitterness and fury of those few Cuban nationalists who kept alive the flame of 508 Jose Marti's dream of a Cuba free from Yankee dominance. Estrada Palma won a second term by electoral fraud. The ensuing revolt, led by the defeated Liberals, brought a second U.S. military occupation (1906-9). The U.S. imposed an interim president, Charles Magoon, who oversaw a new election. Fraud recurred, however, triggering another U.S. military intervention in 1917. All these interventions presented opportunities for U.S. economic interests to deepen their hold over the Cuban economy. The Cuban governments gained a well-deserved reputation for venality and corruption; the Cuban political system was very far from having generated the democratic spirit which the U.S. idealists thought would result from U.S. occupation. Overview: Economic Growth and Social Change During Cuba's years as a protectorate, it underwent a great sugar boom. In the nineteenth century Cuba had rapidly emerged as one of the world's most efficient sugar producers, helped by the modern vacuum methods of refining. As output increased, sugar came to dominate Cuba's economy and, eventually, to have a lasting effect on class structure and social relationships. By the early twentieth century, Cuba was producing several million tons of sugar per year-nearly onequarter of the world supply around World War 1, about 10 percent of the total during the Depression years, close to 20 percent just after World War II. Throughout this entire period sugar exports earned approximately 80 percent of the island's foreign exchange. Such dependence on a single product obviously placed the Cuban economy in an extremely vulnerable position. If the harvest was poor (the result of weather or other conditions) or demand was low (the result of economic slowdown elsewhere) or prices were down (the result of oversupply from other exporters) the Cuban economy would suffer. The variations in production from 1920 to 1959, and even later, illustrate some of the dangers of this situation. Another feature of the sugar boom was concentration of ownership, especially in the hands of American investors. After the 1870s, the new technology, particularly railways, stimulated a rapid reduction in the number of sugar mills (from 1190 in 1877 to only 207 in 1899), despite an increase in the cane hectarage. At the same time, the huge sugar estates began to spread. The independent growers, whose small and medium-sized farms had produced most of the cane before the 1870s, now sold out in growing numbers to the big sugar companies. By 1912 the latter controlled more than 10 percent of all land in Cuba. By 1925 the number of sugar mills had dropped to only 184, and they controlled 17.7 percent of Cuban land. This concentration of mill and land ownership was a natural result of the manner in which the sugar boom had proceeded. Under the shield of the protectorate, U.S. investors poured capital into the building of modern mills (centrales) and the consolidation of canegrowing lands. American-owned mills produced only 15 percent of Cuba's sugar in 1906, but by 1928 their share reached about 75 percent, thanks to loan defaults by Cuban owners; the figure then slacked off, and by 1950 it stood at 47 percent. The technology of sugar production affected labor as well as ownership and management. Cultivation came to requi.re a large-scale work force, especially at harvest time. Cane needs to be replanted only periodically, at intervals of five to twenty-five years. Therefore the principal need for labor is for the harvest, or zafra, a feverish three-month period of intense activity, mostly spent on the arduous cutting of cane with machetes. The rest of the year was known in Cuba as the tiempo muerto, the "dead season" of widespread unemployment and underemployment. But workers had nowhere to go. Because of the enormous plantations they could not lease or purchase small-scale plots of land for their own use. Managers wanted to keep them near the mills, available for work, and for this they devised several tactics. One was to raise cane on land owned by the centrales themselves, usually about 10 percent of the total, thus maintaining the presence of independent growers nearby who would share the problems of labor with them. Another was to let workers go into debt, so they would remain under obligation to the ownership. A third was to encourage the formation of modest urban settlements, called bateyes, that would create workingclass communities. As a result Cuba witnessed the appearance of a rural proletariat, a social group that differed greatly from a classic peasantry. To be sure, there were some isolated and self-sufficient peasant communities in Cuba, particularly in the rugged mountain regions, but they were not a predominant class. Workers in the sugar mills and in the zafras were laborers, not farmers. They were concerned more about wages and working conditions than the acquisition of land. Moreover the rural laborers had intimate contact with the working class in the cities, most notably Havana. Despite the disincentives and inhibitions, they often migrated to urban areas, living in the kind of slum that has come to characterize many of Latin America's largest metropolises: known as colonias populares in Mexico and favelas in Brazil, they acquired in Cuba the suitable name of llega y pon ("come and settle"). And their residents were blighted by poverty and deprivation. By the 1950s, close to 40 percent of the national population lived in cities. Only 40 percent of urban lower-class dwellings had inside toilets, only 40 percent had refrigeration of any kind, and as many as a dozen people lived in a single room. Contact and communication between urban and rural elements of the Cuban working class would eventually have a decisive effect on the course of the country's history, because it permitted the sort of unified, classwide social movement that has been found so rarely in Latin America. It is worth noting, too, that the church played only a minor role in Cuban society, and trade unions had a sporadic and precarious existence. In other words, the outlook and behavior of the Cuban laboring classes were not considered or controlled by existing institutions. Workers would, in time, be 509 available for mobilization. Meanwhile, the U.S. built up more and more control over the Cuban economy. Not only did U.S. capital take over major ownership of plantations and mills, the U.S. became by far the largest customer for Cuba's sugar exports-usually purchasing 75 or 80 percent of the total. This created a complex political dimension to Cuba's economic dependency on the U.S. On the one hand, U.S. investors in Cuba favored U.S. trade policies that helped Cuban sugar's competitive position in the U.S. market. On the other hand, U.S. beet sugar producers, as well as U.S. investors in non-Cuban sources of overseas sugar production, opposed favoritism for sugar imports from Cuba. To complicate matters further, U.S. sugar refiners might have wanted to favor Cuban raw sugar imports, while U.S. owners of sugar refineries in Cuba wanted favoritism only for refined imports. Through it all, Cuba was dependent upon U.S. decisions for the fate of its major industry. And U.S. sugar import policy was invariably a topic of prolonged debate in Washington. Newly independent Cuba had originally signed a reciprocal trade treaty in 1903 which gave Cuban sugar a 20 percent reduction from the existing U.S. tariffs. In return, Cuba gave U.S. exports reductions of 20 to 40 percent in Cuban tariffs. For the next thirty years U.S.- Cuban trade relations grew ever closer, as the Cuban economy was for all intents and purposes integrated into the U.S. economy. The Cuban currency was made interchangeable with the U.S. dollar. Cuban monetary policy was actually set by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, since the Cuban authorities had in effect surrendered any control over the movement of monetary assets between Cuba and the U.S. The eager U.S. investor in Cuba might well have smiled over his good fortune, at least until the end of the First World War. The end of the war had brought a world food shortage and all food exporters, Cuba included, found themselves cashing in on near panic buying conditions for commodities. A crash then came in 1920. In a few months sugar prices fell to less than one-fifth of the record levels of May 1920, and in the following two years the value of the sugar crop declined to little more than one-quarter of the 1920 level. The decline continued through the rest of the 1920s, having a devastating effect on the economy, hitting especially those rural workers whose existence was precarious even in the best of times. With the collapse of the world economy in 1929-30, Cuba soon suffered for its (somewhat involuntary) dependence on one trading partner. The U.S. Congress, under pressure from the domestic sugar beet producers, passed the Smoot-Hawley tariff in 1930, burdening Cuban sugar with new duties. This merely increased the pressure on the staggering Cuban sugar economy, which contracted severely. The only bright spot came with Franklin Roosevelt's assumption of power in Washington in 1933. Roosevelt and the Democratic Congress brought lower tariffs, as the Reciprocal Trade Agreement of 1934 cut duties on Cuban sugar imports, while Cuba gave increased favor to E.S. imports. Also in 1934 Congress mandated fixed quotas among domestic and foreign suppliers of the U.S. sugar market. Cuba's quota was 28 percent, a share that endured, with modifications, until 1960. It gave Cuba a privileged access to the U.S. market. It also made Cuba constantly subject to political or economic blackmail. Most important, it tied Cuba to the will of the U.S. Congress, which could change the legislation at any time. The quota was an economic bonus and a political liability. It symbolized all the vulnerability which "independence" had brought Cuba in the era of American dominance. In sum, the reliance on sugar produced mixed blessings for Cuba's economy and society. It brought considerable prosperity to the island, especially in good zafra years, but it spawned enormous social and economic inequities. It attracted investment from abroad, but placed the country in a subordinate position to the international economy and especially the U.S. Also it created a volatile social structure, one in which rural and urban elements of a long-deprived working class maintained communication with each other. The top of the social pyramid was occupied not by resident landlords, as in classic haciendas, but by foreign entrepreneurs or native owners who often lived in Havana: the upper class was absentee. There was a sizable middle class, at least by Latin American standards, but it was an amorphous stratum that lacked cohesion and self-consciousness. As sociologist Maurice Zeitlin once observed, this combination of factors was bound to have its effect: "Largescale enterprise in the countryside and the intermingling of industrial and agricultural workers in the sugar centrals permeated the country largely with capitalist, nationalistic, secular, anti-traditional values and norms of conduct. In this sense, the country was prepared for development-the only thing lacking being the revolution itself. . " Politics: Corruption and Decay The government the Cubans got in the 1920s and 1930s was among the most corrupt and brutal of the Republic's history. Gerardo Machado gained the presidency by election in 1925 and soon used his executive powers to make himself forever unbeatable at the ballot box. Machado's repressive measures and the growth of nationalist opposition, especially among students and urban labor brought out the uglier realities of the U.S. protectorate. When the global Depression hit, Cuba's export-oriented economy suffered badly. The bottom dropped out of world sugar prices yet again, and the Cuban economy contracted even farther. Total income plummeted and unemployment mushroomed. There was no shortage of political will to exploit the economic distress. Machado’s opposition included a coalition of students, labor leaders, middle-class reformers, and disgruntled politicians, held together by a common hatred for Machado and a common aspiration for a more honest and more just Cuba. Armed plots abounded. Shoot-outs regularly punctuated Havana's nighttime. Machado's police and military bore down with more repressive measures. The U.S., so attentive to some other kinds of deviations from democracy in Cuba, stood by passively. Herbert Hoover's Republican administration, for all its supposed identification with business, was seeking to end the era of ruling the Caribbean via the U.S. marines. Franklin Roosevelt's election victory brought an activist to the White House. While the U.S. assumed a 510 more critical stance toward Machado, the Cubans took matters into their own hands. A successful general strike in August 1933 helped prod the army toward undercutting the dictator, who fled Havana. Now opinion began to polarize sharply. The young radicals dominant in the provisional government joined with army enlisted men, led by Sergeant Fulgencio Batista. This alliance took over the government, alarming Roosevelt's high-level envoy, Sumner Welles. The new civilian leader was Ramon Grau San Martin, a doctorprofessor (the one faculty member to vote against giving Machado an honorary degree) and long-time hero to the student left, with whom he had invariably sided. "Soviets" were formed, followed by occupations of factories and farms. The new government proclaimed a socialist revolution. Washington became deeply worried over the sharp leftward turn by her protectorate. U.S. navy ships took up stations off the Cuban coast; old style intervention seemed near. But a new strongman, eager to follow the Cuban formula for finding power and wealth, was already on stage. On signal from the U.S., Batista easily ousted Grau and the radicals. A front-man president acceptable to Washington was soon arranged, and the radicals, the nationalists, and the reformers watched with bitterness as Cuban politics returned to business as usual. U.S. hegemony was so certain that Washington had no trouble agreeing to abrogate the Platt Amendment in 1934. The U.S. naval base at Guantanamo, for example, was not affected. For the next twenty-five years Cuban politics was dominated by Fulgencio Batista. Between 1934 and 1940 Batista ran his country through puppet presidents. He ruled directly from 1940 to 1944, then went back to a behind-the-scenes role as the one-time radical Grau San Martin returned to the presidency (1944-48). There was little left of Grau the idealist, and the spectacle of his descent into the neither world of Cuban political corruption merely deepened the disgust and moral fury burning in the radicals and nationalists. Grau's successor, another Batista front man, was Carlos Prio Socorras (1948-52). Batista himself retook the presidential reins in a coup, and thenceforth ruled with dictatorial powers. In reality, Cuban politics saw little change between 1934 and 1959. The futility of the electoral system was repeatedly demonstrated, as the perennial strongman (yesterday Machado, today Batista) worked his will/ The honest opposition, far weaker than its true constituency, scrapped harmlessly. What had happened to the revolutionary fervor of 1933? Where was the coalition that had so frightened Washington? It had gone the way of all Cuban nationalist movementsrendered impotent by the unbeatable alliance of the Cuban elites, their political and military handmaidens, and Uncle Sam. If one had asked most Cubans in 1959 whether their little island had any chance of true independence, how many would have dared say yes? How many really thought Cuba could ever successfully assert its identity against the Northern Colossus? Very few. Most educated Cubans undoubtedly thought that the best their country could hope for was to win a few advantages at the margin-maximize Cuba's gain from her inevitable dependence on the U.S. What else could one hope? A startling answer soon came forth. Fidel Castro and the Making of the Revolution Born in 1927, Fidel Castro was the son of a successful Spanish immigrant, and he represented an odd Cuban tradition-the heir of a peninsular who had "made America," as the Spaniards put it in the sixteenth century. But this immigrant's son was not interested in enjoying the comfortable life his background and training might have promised. He wanted to make a different America. Fidel had followed the classic path-primary and secondary education with the Jesuits, then a law degree. He plunged into the turbulent world of student politics, where every brand of nationalism, leftism, and revolutionary thought could be found. He proved to be strongminded, articulate, and ambitious. But he was not in the most radical ranks. Passionately nationalist, he steered dear of the communists, who were the best organized of the student groups. Soon after graduation Fidel began traveling in Latin America, meeting other radical nationalists and learning about other political realities. His most dramatic experience came in Bogota in 1948, when the colossal urban riot of the bogotazo turned the city upside down for two days. The triggering event had been the assassination of the charismatic leftist Colombian politician, Jorge Eliecer Gaitan. The populace rose as one and took over a city whose authorities had abdicated in terror. Fidel was swept up into the wave of popular outrage, and eagerly tried (unsuccessfully) to become a combatant. Those remarkable days must have given him a taste for the possibilities of popular mobilization. Fidel Castro's first assault on Batista's state came straight out of the tradition of romantic Latin American revolutionaries. It was an attack on the 26th of July 1953, against the provincial army barracks at Moncada in the southeastern city of Santiago. Fidel led a band of 165 youths who stormed the garrison in what afterward could only seem a suicidal attack. They had hoped for surprise, but failed. Half the attackers were killed, wounded, or arrested. Fidel and his brother Raul were among the few who got away. The government reaction was swift and ruthless. The police began slaughtering suspects. Fidel and Raul were captured, tried, and sentenced to fifteen years in prison. During the trial Fidel gave a long, impassioned, rambling speech ("History Will Absolve Me"), little noticed at the time but later to become a sacred text of the revolution. The Castro brothers were lucky. They rotted in prison only eleven months before Batista granted amnesty in an attempt to court public opinion and improve the dictator's image. Fidel thus benefited from a tactical concession by a government he was all the more determined to destroy. Given his freedom he immediately fled to Mexico to begin organizing a new revolutionary force. At this point there was little to distinguish him from the innumerable other Caribbean revolutionaries who plotted ineffectually against the Trujillos, Somozas, and Duvaliers – tyrants cut from the same cloth as Batista. In 1956 Fidel set out with a new band of revolutionaries in the Granrna, an ancient yacht whose name would later be immortalized as the title of revolutionary Cuba's official newspaper. With him once again was his brother Raul, more politically radical than Fidel. Also aboard was Ernesto ("Che") 511 Guevara, a twenty-seven year old Argentine physician who had personally witnessed the CIA-conducted overthrow of radically anti-American Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz in 1954. Fidel coordinated his voyage to coincide with the mobilization of anti-Batista forces on the island. They were to rise in communities close to the planned landing site. But the navigation went awry, so did the uprising, and the Granma beached in a swampy area. The eighty-two men struggled to get ashore. The next few days were a nightmare of thirst, hunger, and death at the hands of army units to whom they had been betrayed by local peasants. Seventy of the men were lost, but Fidel, Raul, and Che were not among them. They fled into the Sierra Maestra mountains in eastern Cuba, following their contingency plan. From the mountains, Fidel rebuilt his rebel band and once more launched his war against Batista. For the next two months, until February 1957, Fidel's column was virtually lost to the world. Most of the Cuban press, encouraged by Batista's propaganda, thought Fidel was dead. What suddenly brought the rebels to notice was not their action against the government, but their discovery by a famous U.S. journalist. Fidel and his co-conspirators knew that a key to toppling Batista would be the erosion of the dictator's foreign support, especially from the U.S. Fidel's contacts found the perfect vehicle: Herbert Matthews, a veteran foreign correspondent of the New York Times who had covered the Spanish Civil War and remained an unreconciled partisan of the Republican cause. Matthews was smuggled up to Fidel's mountain hideout and from there wrote a series of stories which exploded on the front page of the most prestigious newspaper in the U.S. Matthews' dramatic dispatches, which extolled the discipline, bravery, and commitment of the rebels, gave Fidel international status overnight. Readers around the world wondered: How could a fifty-seven year old foreign journalist elude the army's cordon and spend days with the supposedly nonexistent guerrillas? Suddenly Batista was on the defensive in world public opinion. He was in that most dangerous of realms seen to be both brutal and impotent. The following month, March 1957, Fidel received reinforcements. Fifty-eight new recruits joined the rebels, having been led in by the underground. Most of the guerrillas now in the Sierra Maestra were newcomers to the wild country, indeed to the countryside itself. Most, like Fidel, were from the middle class. They had joined up not because of a grand vision about transforming all Cuban society, but because they hated the brutality, corruption, and antinationalism of the politicians, who always seemed to serve the dictators. When they deserted the cities, however, they soon found another Cuba. However much they thought they knew about the "other" Cuba, they were unprepared for the realities in the mountains. They found the peasants forced to scratch for a miserable living. The rebels took a strong interest in these people's fate because they needed peasant support to survive in the mountains. It was the first principle of the guerrilla: retain the sympathy of the local residents, not only for supplies, but also so they will not betray you to the authorities. The rebel band was still, however, primarily middle class. A few peasants joined the rebels, but they never came in large numbers and they never held positions of leadership. This is hardly surprising. Most revolutions in history have been led by members of a counter-elite. This is not to say that participation and support from peasants was not important. But the Fidelista phenomenon was middle class in origin and leadership. Its later directions were another matter. Guerrilla warfare is a lonely and dangerous business. Month after month through 1957 the rebels managed the essential-to survive. But they failed to score seriously against the enemy. By December Fidel had become discouraged. His strategy was based on waiting for the urban uprisings. But over the front he had precious little control How long could they wait in the mountains? There were some encouraging signs in early 1958. In February the Cuban bishops issued a pastoral letter calling for a government of national unity. In March the U.S. government, under pressure for supplying arms to the repressive Batista regime, placed an embargo on arms shipments to both sides. This was a political slap to Batista, since it amounted to a partial withdrawal of legitimacy for the established government. After a general strike failed to materialize in April 1958, Fidel decided to change his strategy. The guerrillas had to become more aggressive. The strike failure also convinced Batista that he should now move, and the army launched a "liquidation campaign" the following month. It was a disaster. Whole army units were captured, along with secret codes and extensive supplies for arms. By August the army had withdrawn from the mountains, defeated by their own poor leadership and faulty training and by superior intelligence and dedication on the rebel side. Through the rest of 1958 a savage guerrilla war raged on. There were never any set battles, never any waves of peasants confronting Batista's soldiers. It was a war of hit-and-run, with bombings, sabotage, and harassment. Batista's response was counter-terror. Since he could seldom catch the guerrillas, he sent his goons against the students and the middle class suspected of having links to the 26th of July Movement. In so doing, Batista was rapidly enlarging the support for Fidel Here was the classic guerrilla tactic: goad the unpopular government into repressive measures, which then will serve to recruit new rebels against the government. Support for Batista began to evaporate. As dictator his greatest card to play had always been his ability to keep order. Now even that was disappearing. Adding to the frustration and fury of the army and police was the fact that they could never pin down the enemy. They were unprepared for the kind of underground that could elude their network of regular informants. Torture and execution only produced new rebel adherents. In November Batista carried out a presidential election, running a new front-man candidate in the hope that removing himself from the limelight might improve the situation. The result was a dramatic signal that the government had lost public support: most of the voters abstained. Here was the kind of political development that the rebels had been working for. Batista maneuvered desperately to hold on to his 512 ebbing support from the Eisenhower administration. But the U.S., as in the case of the dictator Machado in 1933, now saw its enormous interests in Cuba endangered by the excesses of a rapacious and brutal dictator. Batista had outlived his time. Batista had no desire to fight a losing cause to the end. He could see that his power was shrinking daily. His army and police had become both hated and derided. He had lost the all-important support from Washington. And the country had become so convinced of his fall that the economy was increasingly disrupted as businessmen and bankers waited for the inevitable. Suddenly, on New Year's Eve, he called his aides together, designated a successor president, and took off with a planeload of relatives for the Dominican Republic. The way was now dear for Fidel's triumphal entry into Havana. The guerrilla war had been so savage, the repression so fierce, the build-up so long, that Batista's sudden exit took the rebels by surprise. Crowds went wild in the cities, especially Havana. The red and black flags of the 26th of July Movement were everywhere. Defining the Revolution Euphoria is the only word to describe Havana's mood in the early days of 1959. Fidel had achieved genuine heroic status. The question now occupying the minds of the Cuban middle class, workers, peasants, foreign investors, the U.S. embassy, and other observers was, What kind of revolution would this be? Fidel entered a political vacuum. The civil war had not only discredited Batista, it had besmirched the entire political class, all, to greater or lesser degree, compromised by the dictator. However important the urban conspirators, with their heroic tactics against the army and police in the last half of 1958, the momentum now lay with the men from the Sierra Maestra in the green fatigue uniforms. The visible power was the rebel army. It was to remain the key political institution thereafter. Fidel's greatest asset, aside from his own formidable leadership gifts, was the desperate desire for change among his fellow Cubans. The most underprivileged, the rural poor, had never counted for anything in the electoral system. 'iN"orking classes in the cities and towns had precious little more weight. The most restless and most important social sector was the middle class, which had produced the movement's leadership, such as Fidel and Raul. This class was ready to receive a new political message. They were first of all disgusted by the old political cadre, and repulsed by the dictators (Machado, Batista) Cuba regularly produced. Second, they were moved by appeals for greater social justice. Third, they longed for a more independent Cuba. That meant a Cuba freer of the U.S. Could there be a Cuban nationalism that was not anti-American? In theory, perhaps; in practice, any assertion of Cuban national dignity was bound to collide with the Yankee presence. 1959 was a year of drama for the Revolution. For all his heroism, Fidel arrived as a political unknown. The government began as a triumvirate. Manuel Urrutia was president, Jose Mir6 Cardona was prime minister, and Fidel was commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The illusion of collegiality collapsed in February when Mir6 Cardona resigned, protesting his lack of real power. Fidel assumed Mir6 Cardona's post, portending the pattern of things to come. The first major political crisis arose over what to do with the captured Batista officials who had been responsible for the worst of the repression. The revolutionaries resorted to arbitrary procedures in trying their victims, appealing to sentiments of "ordinary justice" to legitimize their executions. In the first six months of 1959 about 550 were put to death, following trial by various revolutionary courts. These executions, punctuated by cries of paredon! (to the wall!), worried the liberals in Cuba and their sympathizers abroad, especially in the U.S. In April 1959 Fidel set out for New York, where he was to visit the UN headquarters. The trip was of extreme political importance, since U.S. opinion would be crucial for events in Cuba. From Fidel's standpoint, the visit was probably a success. He managed to project the image of a nationalist reformer, strongly opposed to foreign intervention, but also not a communist. He was careful to maintain only distant contact with the U.S. government (President Eisenhower refused any meeting and Vice President Richard Nixon had to receive the bearded revolutionary), while skillfully cultivating elite centers of opinion with, for example, a triumphant appearance in Harvard Stadium. Fidel hammered on the need for radical reform in Cuba, especially land reform. How could anyone who knew Cuban agriculture disagree? Fidel returned to Cuba to carry out his most radical measure to date: the Agrarian Reform Law of May 17, 1959. The law eliminated the giant estates, expropriating farmlands over 1000 acres, with compensation to be paid in Cuban currency bonds in proportion to the declared value for taxes in 1958 (deliberately undervalued, as was the custom). No foreigners would henceforth be allowed to own agricultural land. The expropriated lands would be turned over to small private holders and cooperatives. A National Institute of Agrarian Reform (INRA) was created to implement these far-reaching measures. Critics in Cuba and abroad, especially in the U.S., began to raise the alarm. Was this not the first step to communism? Hadn't Fidel appointed a communist, Nunez Jimenez, as the operating head of INRA? Political polarization heightened in June 1959. Fidel announced the discovery of a plot against the Revolution. Noncommunists among the supporters of Batista's overthrow now became increasingly alarmed. A former president of the Senate attacked the agrarian reform and called for the elections which Fidel had promised. Later that same month the commander of the air force, major Pedro Diaz Lanz, resigned in protest over the alleged communist influence in the military. Diaz Lanz then fled to the U.S. and pushed hard his story that Fidel was a communist. Such defections strengthened the hand of the growing antiCastro elements in the U.S. In July Fidel staged what was to be a regular drama in revolutionary Cuba. He resigned the premiership in the midst of what he described as a political crisis brought on by the resignation of President Urrutia, whom Fidel had accused of joining Diaz Lanz in a conspiracy against the Revolution. Later in July there were huge rallies in Havana, where the carefully primed multitudes called for Fidel to return to the pre- 513 miership. He bowed to their wilL Fidel was now in a strong enough position to speak his mind on the delicate subject of elections. He promised there would be no more elections for at least four or five years. There was now brewing a case that would for many become a hallmark of the Revolution's radicalization. Major Huberto Matos, one of Fidel's oldest political allies and a long-time revolutionary, chose to break with the Fidelista line. He resigned from the armed forces and issued a letter attacking the growth of communist influence. Fidel's response was swift. He jailed Matos and mobilized a huge propaganda campaign against him as a traitor to the Revolution. For the next decade and a half, Matos, locked away in prison, remained for the Fidelista regime the supreme symbol of revolutionary deviationism. For many foreign observers, Matos remained the quintessential victim of Stalinist-style repression. In the waning months of 1959 Cuba's line became more stridently anti-American. There were daily charges of Yankee-backed invasion plots to restore Batista. Such charges were by no means fancifuL Exiles were already flying missions from Florida, firing the cane fields and dropping anti-revolutionary leaflets. Although the White House and the State Department had not yet made up their minds about Fidel's intentions, the CIA and the Pentagon had long since ceased to have doubts. Meanwhile, Fidel had his eye on Washington-always the cockpit of decision in Cuban politics. The year 1960 proved to be even more decisive for the course of the Cuban Revolution. By the end of Fidel's second year in power, four basic trends had taken hold: (1) the nationalization of the economy: (2) a sharp swing to the Soviet bloc; (3) the establishment of an authoritarian regime; and (4) the launching of an egalitarian socioeconomic policy. All Cuban nationalists had been angered over the years by the degree of U.S. control of the Cuban economy. It was inevitable that any Cuban government attempting to reassert Cuban control over its economy would collide with the U.S., both the investors and the government in Washington which had so often back them up. The major clash came over oil, always an emotional economic issue in the Third World. When Fidel had discovered that he could buy crude oil cheaper from the Russians than from Venezuela, he ordered the U.S.-owned oil refineries located in Cuba to process the Russian crude. Although an old law obligated them to comply, they refused. Fidel promptly confiscated the U.S. oil companies. Partially in retaliation, President Eisenhower suspended the Cuban sugar quota in the U.S. The Cuban government now followed by seizing virtually all the rest of U.S. property. That included electricity and telephone companies (another prime irritant to the nationalists), sugar mills, and nickel mines. The U.S. retaliated by embargoing all trade to Cuba, except medicines and foodstuffs. Other foreign firms in Cuba were also nationalized. The nationalization campaign was not restricted to foreign owners. In the course of 1960 all major firms in Cuba were nationalized, including textiles, tobacco, cement, banks, and department stores. Agriculture took longer. The first move, in 1959, was against the sugar plantations and mills owned by Batista or his closest collaborators. But the shape of agricultural policy, always a tough problem for command economies, had not emerged by the end of 1960. The swing to the Soviet bloc was neither a cause nor an effect of the clash with the U.S.; it was part and parcel of the same process. Initially it was a question of how far the Soviets might be willing to commit themselves in Cuba, so far from Moscow and so close to the U.S. backyard. The Russians proved bolder than almost anyone expected. In February 1960, well before the full economic break with the U.S., the Soviets signed a trade agreement with Cuba, granting $100 million credit to buy equipment and promising to purchase 4 million tons of sugar in each of the coming four years. Fidel was now developing an alternative source of technology and equipment, and the Soviets were getting ready to integrate Cuba as a "socialist" ally in the Third World. As 1960 continued, the Soviets added military weapons to the equipment headed for Cuba. Technical and artistic missions also arrived, to fill out the lesson in how to build a socialist society. By the end of 1960 Cuba's swing toward the East was decisive. Still, Fidel had not yet announced Cuba's total conversion to the Soviet brand of socialism, and foreign observers held conflicting views. Some, like Vice President Nixon, were convinced that Castro was a full-fledged communist. Others, sharing deep concern for social justice, hoped Fidel could find an independent path between the superpowers; if he failed, they argued, it would be because an intolerant U.S. pushed him into Russian arms. Revolutionary Cuba's state was emerging in a piecemeal, ad hoc fashion. Fidel began by proclaiming his commitment to the old constitution, which Batista had repudiated by his coup of 1952. But by what institutions would or could the new Cuba be ruled? The problem was a classic, one that Salvador Allende would later encounter in Chile: How to carry out fundamental economic and social change when existing government institutions were set up to maintain the status quo. Though the old legal system remained in place, for example, there was never any attempt to elect a new legislature. The 26th of July Movement could hardly provide an institutional base. It had never developed into a tightly knit organization, and it was far from a political party. From the start, Fidel relied on the most responsive and popular institution at hand: the revolutionary army. In the fall of 1960 the government created an important new institution: Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDRs). Locally based citizens' groups, they were organized primarily for civil defense. The constant threat of invasion-by exiles and/or by the U.S.-necessitated such a measure. Since the Revolution also had enemies at home, the CDRs also had the task of monitoring the population for counterrevolutionary opinions or behavior. That same year Fidel moved to eliminate or neutralize the key institutions of the former "bourgeois" order. By December the press had been brought into line, often through seizure by communistcontrolled labor unions. Even the satirical Bohemia, long a mordant anti-Batista organ, fell victim. By 514 December Fidel had gained power to appoint new judges at will, as the independent judiciary was phased out. The universities and the unions, once centers of opposition to the government, were also brought under absolute government control. A new law gave the minister of labor the power to "intervene," i.e., assume legal control over, any union. All private clubs and associations were subordinated to government direction. The church, although never strong in twentieth century Cuba, was watched closely, as the revolutionaries launched frequent attacks on "reactionary foreign priests." In 1961 the government nationalized all private schools, thereby removing one of the church's most important prerevolutionary roles. The Revolution set out to create new institutions in place of the old. Fidel seemed to be everywhere. Mobilization was the inexorable theme: mobilization against invaders, mobilization against social and economic problems at home. All Cubans would become guerrillas. To achieve this goal a huge militia was created: by the end of 1960 it totalled 500,000 out of a total population of 6.7 million. It was, after all, an obvious way to organize the new Cuba. And none could doubt the identity of the commander-in-chief. The only political party to survive the revolutionary transition was the Communist Party. Never a member, Fidel had throughout 1959 avoided any personal identification with the party. But he also made it clear that anti-communism would be considered counterrevolutionary. As 1959 continued, he increasingly turned to party members to handle such areas as agrarian reform. Their increasing participation did not, however, threaten Fidel's effective control of the party. What most Cubans cared about was not political structure but how the Revolution would change their lives. On this score Fidel and his guerrilla companions kept their eyes fixed on the poor, especially in the countryside. The revolutionaries were determined to attack the legacy of the corrupt, capitalist Cuba: illiteracy, disease, malnutrition, and dilapidated housing. A year-long crusade in 1960 cut illiteracy rates in half (Cuba's illiteracy rate of 25 percent in 1959 was already low by Latin American standards), and it has virtually disappeared since then. Sensing the direction of the Revolution, the rich (and many from the middle class) began to flee, and the government acquired a windfall: the refugees abandoned assetshomes, offices, farms-that the state could now distribute. In a typically populist move, Fidel began his government by freezing prices and ordering major wage increases (a step also taken by Peron in 1946 and Allende in 1970). This led to a buying spree, but the inventories soon disappeared. Batista had left $500 million in foreign exchange reserves. But that was quickly spent, especially on oil. So the era of seemingly painless redistribution was over by the end of 1959. In 1960 Cubans discovered the cost of the nationalist, egalitarian policies of the Revolution. For once in Cuban history, however, the huge inequalities of sacrifice had been eradicated. But the number of defectors also grew. Most attacked the guerrillas for betraying the hope of rapid elections. Instead, they charged, Fidel and his clique were leading Cuba toward communist totalitarianism. Most probably were sincere. Some also thought it the best tactic to arouse the U.S. Some people in the U.S. government needed little encouragement. By late 1959 a hard-line faction in the CIA and military intelligence saw Fidel as a Soviet foil who should be dealt with directly. The CIA began formulating an endless series of often bizarre conspiracies such as slipping Fidel an exploding cigar. All were aimed at disrupting or sabotaging the new government. All involved Cuban exiles, who were flooding into Miami. Therein lay one of the CIA's greatest vulnerabilities: working with exiles made security questionable. Fidel's intelligence apparatus, soon aided by the more experienced Soviets, cultivated its Miami contacts and neutralized much of the CIA's laborious plotting. The most obvious strategy for the U.S. was to support an exile invasion of Cuba. That was how Jose Marti had arrived back in 1895, and it was the standard strategy in Caribbean-exile politics. Since late 1959 the CIA had been organizing anti-Castro exiles. In July 1960 the CIA empresario of the exile invasion, Richard Bissell, convinced President Eisenhower to approve the training of an invasion force. From that moment on, Bissell, a formidable intellect and bureaucratic infighter, became a super-advocate for the invasion. The "toughness" of U.S. policy toward revolutionary Cuba became an issue in the 1960 presidential campaign, which featured Eisenhower's vice president, Richard Nixon, and the relatively unknown senator from Massachusetts, John Fitzgerald Kennedy. In their first televised debate, Kennedy took a more aggressive stance toward Cuba than Nixon, who knew of the invasion plan, which he did not wish to compromise. It was Kennedy, the ostensibly tougher candidate, who won the presidency and inherited the "Cuban problem." Eisenhower broke diplomatic relations in January 1961, in response to Fidel's demand that the U.S. drastically reduce its embassy in Havana. In April, still inexperienced in foreign affairs, Kennedy found himself pressured to approve an exile invasion of Cuba. Wanting to do his anti-communist duty, but fearful of the possible effect on world opinion, the new president agonized. He finally gave the go-ahead, but demanded that there be no identifiable U.S. involvement: above all, no combat involvement of U.S. forces. It was an ironic concern, given the CIA's critical role, and it would have its effect on events. As rumors mounted, an invasion force headed for Cuba in April 1961. The operation proved a misadventure from the beginning. After endless debate, President Kennedy reduced the exile-piloted air cover and vetoed the use of any U.S. planes. The invaders foundered in an ill-chosen bit of southern coast, on the Bay of Pigs, which Fidel happened to know well. The exiles were hopelessly disorganized. The hopedfor uprisings, which would supposedly paralyze the Cuban defenders, never materialized. The Cuban defenses proved more than adequate. The invasion brigades were quickly captured. They never had a chance to adopt their fall-back procedure-head for the mountains and mount a guerrilla operation. The Bay of Pigs could not have been a greater triumph for Fidel and the revolutionaries. The U.S. had finally shown its intentions for what Fidel had always said they were: a desire to turn the clock back in Cuba. Although the CIA had tried to screen out the 515 more unsavory ex-Batista types , the invaders included more than a few who had served the dictator. Fidel and his supporters seized on those names to prove that the U.S. wanted to restore the discredited dictator. The failed invasion marked a watershed in U.S.- Cuban relations, Washington's most obvious strategy had failed. Cuba would not be the Guatemala of the Caribbean. What options were left for the aroused u.S.? Precious few. Now the issue shifted to the level of the superpowers. In July 1960, Khrushchev had rattled Soviet missiles in defense of Cuban socialism. In April 1961 Cuba didn't need Soviet help to repulse the CIA proteges. But would the Americans stop there? The Soviets decided they must back up their threat by putting missiles in Cuba itself. The decision took almost everyone by surprise. Why would the Russians want to put intermediate-range missiles in the U.S. backyard, when their long-range missiles could easily reach the u.S. from Soviet launching pads? Yet the Soviets went ahead, and by October 1962 they were installing intermediate-range rocket bases in Cuba. This was an unprecedented challenge to the balance of military power. The U.S. demanded that the Soviets withdraw their missiles from Cuba, under sanction of a naval quarantine on all Soviet military shipments to Cuba. The world seemed to balance on the edge of nuclear war. After a fateful interval, Khrushchev complied. The missiles were withdrawn. The superpower confrontation in the Caribbean had fateful implications for Cuba. First, Fidel himself was not consulted at any stage. The result was to make Cuba, in Latin American eyes, into a Soviet satellite in essential security matters. Second, the Soviets withdrew their missiles only because 'the U.S. (secretly) promised it would not invade Cuba. This was the least noticed and least understood result of the missile crisis: the Soviets had forced the u.S. to allow the socialist experiment in Cuba to proceed. When Fidel declared himself a Marxist-Leninist, in December 1961, the statement had come as an anti-climax. Whatever his ideological confessions, Fidel continued to be the overwhelmingly dominant personality in the Revolution. Decade of Experiment After defeating the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, the revolutionaries could concentrate on the economic tasks facing the new Cuba. The central fact was that the Cuban economy revolved around exporting sugar, especially to the U.S. The revolutionaries were determined to change that humiliating dependence. The chief architect was Ernesto Guevara, the Argentine physician-guerrilla who was the most creative theoretician among the revolutionaries. Guevara drew up a Four Year Plan which called for agricultural diversification (de-emphasis on sugar) and industrialization (the manufacture of light consumer goods). Cuba launched this ambitious plan amid great fanfare. The Revolution would break the stranglehold of a monocultural export economy. By 1962 the results had already proved disappointing. In part, Guevara and his youthful planners were reaping the whirlwind of the shortsighted policies of 1959-60. Stocks of consumer goods were exhausted, foreign exchange reserves were gone, and shortages were everywhere. Even worse, sugar production had taken a plunge. In 1961 the Cubans had produced 6.8 million tons of sugar, the second highest harvest in Cuban history. This output merely disguised the deliberate neglect the government was showing to sugar. They seemed to take it for granted. Cane fields were plowed under, new planting was delayed, fertilizer was forgotten. In 1962 the harvest dropped to 4.8 million tons and in 1963 it was only 3.8 million tons, the smallest since 1945. The fall was disastrous for export earnings. The industrialization drive was also going badly. Cuba lacked the raw materials and expertise to rush into industrialization, even in light goods. Since 1960 the U.S. had enforced a strict economic embargo against Cuba, pressuring all U.S. firms (and their Latin American and European subsidiaries) to cease trade with Cuba. This embargo, enforced by U.S. legal measures, forced Cuba to depend largely on the Soviets and the eastern block for equipment. Direction was to come from highly centralized planning bureaucracies, modeled after Soviet and Czech patterns. The effort was ineffective and expensive. Even the Russians seemed uneasy about underwriting a socialist utopia in the Caribbean. In mid-1963 the Soviets put their foot down. The Cubans must slow down the industrialization drive and improve their planning. They must recognize Cuba's comparative advantage: sugar. Cuban policymakers moved in this direction, not only because of Soviet pressure but also because they saw the need for change. Che Guevara resigned, confessing his errors. Fidel, ever on the initiative, now embraced sugar, which he had so recently spurned. In 1963 he announced that in 1970 (later labeled the "Year of the Decisive Endeavor") Cuba would break all records for sugar production: it would harvest 10 million tons. Thus the famous target of 10 million tons. Debate continued over strategies for economic development and political consolidation. Still active in the regime, Che Guevara argued for an "idealistic" strategy, a Maoist approach that would totally eliminate the market and material incentives. The economy would be fully collectivized and directly by a centralized planning authority. A radical break with the capitalist past would require a "new man," a Cuban who would work for moral rewards (decorations, public praise) and thus reflect a new, higher level of political consciousness. Through dedication and sacrifice the "new" Cubans could contribute to the rapid construction of socialism. Here the Cuban leaders were going through the familiar dilemma of communist regimes: how to reconcile Marxist idealism with a pragmatic economic policy. Guevara's idealists further argued that the construction of socialism at home required the aggressive promotion of revolution abroad. They wanted to prove that a guerrilla strategy could work throughout Latin America and perhaps the entire Third World. According to this voluntaristic vision, pragmatism and conventional institutions (political parties, labor unions) played only a minor role; the need was to create revolution now. Guevara's main opponent in this debate was Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, an economist and long-time Communist Party member. Rodriguez took a practical approach. He favored a more measured use of central planning, partial reliance on market mechanisms, and 516 autonomy left to the individual enterprises. He though state firms should have to account for their expanses and earnings. In short, Rodriguez and his allies proposed a more conventional path, relying on material incentives instead of only moral ones. They favored also a strong party and a "flexible" policy toward Latin America. This meant a willingness to deal with regimes that Guevara saw only as targets for revolutionary opposition. While the arguments went on, Cuba was returning to sugar. Even with the de-emphasis on industrialization, however, economic production was disappointing. 1964 yielded a 9 percent growth rate for most of the economy, and that was primarily catch-up from declines of 1961-63. In 1965 the figure slipped to 1.5 percent, less than the rate of population growth, and in 1966 became negative again ( -3.7 percent). Indecision in basic policymaking was not building a dynamic socialism. In 1966 Fidel brought the debate to an end. He endorsed Che Guevara's idealism. Cuba would make a gigantic collective effort accompanied by moral incentives. This immediately increased Fidel's own power, as he himself took charge of the now strengthened central planning apparatus.He and his trusted lieutenants plunged into the minutiae of economic management. Fidel selected and dropped favorite projects, often reacting impulsively on his never-ending visits to worksites around the island. The atmosphere recalled the early romantic days of the Revolution-endless rhetoric, euphoric dreams, celebration of the selfless "new man." Along with this idealistic mobilization at home went a stepped-up commitment to revolution abroad. Cuba sought out guerrilla movements across Latin America, offering arms, training, expertise. Che Guevara spearheaded the drive. Always a heroic figure, Che became the nemesis of the CIA and the Latin American military. Unfortunately for Che, however, he chose the altiplano (highlands) of Bolivia to start the spread of his "many Vietnams" in South America, and there met death in 1967 at the hands of U.S.-trained Bolivian Ranger troops. One important problem was his poor communication with the Bolivian Communist Party, which considered him a foreign adventurer who knew nothing of Bolivia. This rift mirrored the gap that had arisen between the Soviets and Cuba. Havana had strayed far from the prevailing Moscow line on exporting revolution. By 1968 Fidel was pulling back from the Guevarist line. There had already been signs that Che did not get full support from Havana during his ill-fated campaign in Bolivia. By supporting the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, Fidel signalled a return to Soviet orthodoxy. He then began to downplay the export of revolution. However heroic Che's death, the new policies suggested it might have been in vain. On the domestic front, however, Guevarist policies continued intact. The spring of 1968 saw a "revolutionary offensive." The remainder of the private sector was nationalized, consumption was subordinated to investment, and Cubans were exhorted to give their all to reach the omnipresent target of 10 million tons of sugar in 1970. The magic year came and all of Cuba was mobilized to cut cane. Even visiting Soviet sailors, much to their shock, were whisked off the docks to wield machetes. Everything was sacrificed to release labor for the cane fields. Sensing that the target was distant, the authorities left some of the 1969 harvest in the fields, hoping to improve the 1970 figure. At harvest time they tried to cut every available scrap. It was no usethe zafra reached only 8.5 million tons. It was a prodigious total, the largest in Cuban history, but it might as well have been half that amount. So much propaganda, so many promises. The entire fate of the Revolution had seemed to ride on the scales at the sugar mills. It was a mortal blow for the "voluntaristic" philosophy of Che. The psychological toll was enormous. But Fidel, ever resourceful, was about to change policies again. Cuba since 1970 The failure of the 10-million-ton effort made Fidel's about-face easier. Everyone could see that the "idealistic" model had failed. On July 26, 1970, Fidel confessed alL In a marathon speech (the "Let the Shame Be Welcome" speech), Castro took on his own shoulders the responsibility for the quixotic crusade for the super-harvest. He offered to resign, but the crowds cried no. The economic failure was obliterated by revolutionary theater. Cuban policy now turned more pragmatic. First, there were to be new management and planning systems involving greater decentralization and more use of "profits" as a basis for decision making. Second, the private sector was to be given a greater role in both agriculture and services. Third, pay would now be linked to output, with premiums for needed skills. Finally, there was to be greater economic interaction with the West. This more conventional economic policy was accompanied by a similar shift in institutional policy. The Communist Party was now strengthened, the unions and other mass organizations were reorganized and given a greater role. This move toward greater "orthodoxy," (i.e., closer resemblance to Soviet practice) affected culture as well. Central controls over education and mass media were strengthened. Fidel began to sound like Khrushchev at his most obscurantist. In early 1971 Fidel launched furious attacks on "former friends" of the Revolution who had charged that Fidel's personalistic regime was leading Cuba toward economic defeat. One was the French agronomist Rene Dumont, who attributed Cuba's agricultural failures to Fidel's egomania and the helterskelter militarization of the Cuban economy. Another critic, the Hungarian-born K.S. Karol, was more devastating because he had a deeper knowledge of Marxist thought and communist experience from which to gauge Fidel's limitations. Also in early 1971 Fidel cracked down on the Cuban artistic scene by arresting the internationally known writer Heberto Padilla. Apparently under coercion, Padilla was forced to confess crimes against the Revo- . lution. He later repeated his mea culpa before a writers' conference, which set the tone for a tougher standard of political loyalty now expected of all artists in revolutionary Cuba. Part and parcel of this policy shift was an increasing approximation with the Soviet Union, which meant closer conformity to Soviet models of economic and political decision making. It had been under way since 517 1968, but the shift in domestic policy now made Cuba's overall stance more consistent. Radical experimentation was over. The inevitable logic of Cuba's enormous economic and military dependence on the Soviets was being played out. Fidel had now become a reliable ally of the U.S.S.R. in the Third World. Gone were the harsh attacks on the orthodox communist parties. As the decade of the 1970s began, the Cuban Revolution was approaching the Soviet model more closely than ever before. As the Cuban Revolution entered the 1980s there could be no doubt that the one-time guerrillas had created a new society. There had been more than two decades to educate and train new generations in the commitment to an egalitarian, communitarian ideal. They had been able to train their own technicians, with Soviet and East European help, to replace the cadres that had fled the radicalizing regime. There had been time to make Cuba a formidable fighting force. No future wouldbe freedom fighter would be able to duplicate the epic of the Granma. Cuba had also settled into an extreme economic dependence on the U.S.S.R., one that bore much resemblance to her one-time dependence on the U.S. Soviet economic assistance to Cuba in 1989 was estimated at $4.2 billion by the U.S. government. Although the exact total was difficult to calculate, it probably equaled about one-quarter of Cuban GNP. The integration of trade, both export and import, with the Eastern bloc was close to what it had once been with the U.S. Had Cuba merely traded one brand of dependency for another? In the most obvious sense the answer had to be yes. Yet the ties to the Soviet Union did not produce the direct ownership which had created such a nationalist backlash against U.S. economic penetration before 1959. Cuba, nonetheless, cannot do without trade with the capitalist West. Castro desperately needs capital goods and technology which only they can supply. To buy, he needs hard currency, 70 percent of which Cuba earns from sugar sales on the open market. Cuba had run up a hard currency debt of $6 billion by 1990. In 1986 Fidel was forced to suspend principal and interest payments, thus crippling efforts to gain further financing from capitalist sources. There were some features of the world economy Cuba could not escape. Beyond the statistics, however, there were more pressing questions. What were the consequences of this new dependency? We know that Fidel had echoed the Soviet-line denunciation of Solidarity in Poland ("the antisocialists and counter-revolutionaries") and praised the Soviet intervention against "the savage acts of provocation, subversion and interference against the revolution" in Afganistan. Cuba sent more than 30,000 troops and social service personnel to support proSoviet regimes in such African countries as Angola and Ethiopia. But what were the deeper implications for Cuban society? The profound social revolution in Cuba had been possible only because of Soviet military protection and economic aid. It remains unclear whether Cubans have had more bargaining power with Moscow than they once had with Washington, since SovietCuban relations occur in far greater secrecy than had relations with the U.S. It is the ultimate irony of this nationalist revolution that after more than three decades it remained as of mid1991, an economic ward of a distant superpower. The Revolution has brought many changes to Cuba. For those who had lived with little hope in capitalist Cuba, the Revolution has brought a much improved standard of living. Socialist Cuba's greatest triumphs have been in serving basic human needs. Illiteracy has been wiped out, and a comprehensive school system created. Its teaching content is, not surprisingly, highly ideological, designed to inculcate the new socialist values. Basic health care, especially preventive care, has been extended to the lower sectors. Medical training has been geared to public health. Food distribution, always one of the most shocking reflections of social inequality, has been guaranteed by rationing. Minimum nutritional standards have been established and largely met for the entire population. The result is that life expectancy rose from sixtythree years in 1960 to seventy-three in 1980, and the infant mortality rate fell by more than two-thirds in the same period. The role of women was another area of significant change. The tradition of machismo was especially strong in prerevolutionary Cuba and has proved a major obstacle to the feminist movement. To take a striking example, by mid-1980 only 19 percent of the Communist Party members and candidates for membership were women. Nonetheless, the Federation of Cuban Women (Federaci6n de Mujeres Cubanas, or FMC) has gone a long way in changing opinion and behavior. The number of women in higher education and professional schools (especially medicine, where female students now outnumber males) has increased sharply. The FMC was instrumental in getting adopted in 1975 an egalitarian family code which obligated husbands to do half of all family chores. Any viewer of the Cuban film Portrait of Teresa knows this and other feminist goals will not be easily reached in Cuba. But where is that not true? Despite the perceptible change in Cuban attitudes, married women, especially those with children, have found it difficult to enter the fulltime labor force. One reason is the cost and inconvenience of child care. Another is the fact that an additional income may bring few additional benefits, since consumer goods remain scarce. Housing was the other basic need that had been so unequally distributed before 1959. Here the revolutionaries had trouble making rapid progress. It was easy enough to expropriate the residences of the wealthy and give them to special groups (like students). But new construction was slower and more expensive. In the short run, investment in new housing was not seen as a top priority. There the Cubans were following, perhaps inadvertently, the example of the Soviets, for whom the shortage of housing had been a major social problem. Ironically enough, one of Cuba's greatest economic failures was in agriculture. In the early years of the Revolution that was understandable. The guerrillas were eager to repudiate Cuba's long-time bondage to a single export crop. Guevara's great hope had been to diversify agriculture, as well as to industrialize. Even after the turn toward economic realism in 1963, food production lagged. According to a United Nations study, Cuba's agricultural performance for 1961-1976 was tied with that of Chile for the worst in Latin 518 America. After 1976 farm output grew at a healthy rate, but a decade later Cuba was still seriously dependent on food imports. As the 1970s dosed, both the U.S. and the Cuban governments sought to improve their relations with one another. Fidel decided to let U.S. relatives of Cubans visit the island-the first time since early in the Revolution. And 100,000 relatives arrived in Cuba in 1979, loaded down with electronics and other consumer goods. Since these goods did not exist or were available only at high prices on the black market, many Cubans realized how limited their consumer goods were after two decades of the Revolution. This frustration undoubtedly contributed to what became a dramatic exodus from Cuba in 1980. The trigger was the Cuban government's decision to withdraw its guard at the Peruvian embassy, in response to a violent incident involving Cubans who charged the embassy barrier to gain asylum and, ideally, safe conduct out of Cuba. Word suddenly spread that the embassy was unguarded and within twenty-four hours 10,800 Cubans rushed onto the embassy grounds, jammed in like cattle. The government, taken aback by the embarrassing surge of dissidents, announced they would all be allowed to emigrate, along with anyone else who cared to inform the authorities. The total eventually reached 125,000. Most went from the port of Mariel via small craftmany hardly seaworthy-provided by the Cuban community in Florida. These 125,000 followed the previous waves of exiles, including the 160,000 who had left in the officially coordinated U.S.-Cuban program between 1965 and 1973. Why the exodus? Across the newspaper front pages and television screens in the U.S., West Europe, and the rest of Latin America were the images of almost 11,000 desperate Cubans crammed into the Peruvian embassy grounds, without food or water. To refute the image of the desperate would-be exiles, hundreds of thousands of Cubans staged huge marches through Havana. But diplomats in Havana estimated that if Mariel had remained open perhaps 1,000,000 would have chosen to go to Florida. Whatever the exact potential, it was far larger than any foreign diplomat would have guessed before the April incident. The discontent could be partly explained as the frustration of Cubans who were weary of waiting for the higher standard of living promised for so long. The Cuban government was well aware of this discontent, and in the wake of Mariel it supplemented the food rationing system with "free farmers' markets." But the "Rectification Program" beginning in 1986 abolished small-scale private businesses and reenshrined moral incentives, attempting to make a virtue of the country's deepening economic crisis. The latter was exacerbated by a severe hard currency shortage, caused in part by the low world sugar prices. But "rectification" took Cuba in precisely the opposite direction from the perestroika then being launched by Fidel's mentors in the Soviet Union. Although domestic economic performance, if measured by production (rather than by income, as in Western economies), had held up well, averaging 7.3 percent growth from 1981 to 1985, growth dropped sharply after 1985, even turning negative for some years. Unlike in capitalist Latin America, however, Cuba's population was not put at risk by low economic growth, thanks to the food rationing and comprehensive health services that have given Cuba indicators of morbidity and mortality equal to those of the industrialized world. In 1990 Soviet aid faltered as oil shipments fell 2 million tons short of domestic needs, causing a severe fuel shortage. Even more serious, the Soviets and aU of Cuba's East European trading partners began to demand hard currency instead of continuing the virtual barter relationship on which Cuba had relied since the 1960s. The collapse of communism in East Europe and the disintegration of the Soviet economy were now exposing Cuba to the perils of its post-capitalist dependency. Although Cuba had reached mid-1991 without the signs of mass discontent that doomed communism in East Europe, the strain had begun to show in recent years. In May 1987 the deputy chief of the Cuban Air Force and a hero of the Bay of Pigs climbed into a plane and defected to Florida. In June 1989 a heavier blow felt. The army's most respected leader, General Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez, architect of brilliant battlefield victories over the South African forces when Cuba fought to consolidate the communist regime in Angola, was tried and executed, along with three other high officers. The charges were drug-running and embezzlement. Their dramatic show trial, conducted in great haste, aroused memories of Stalin's infamous purges. Many asked how officers who had enjoyed Fidel's closest confidence could have organized such a vast conspiracy without the knowledge of a leader with a legendary appetite for administrative detail. Or was this a way of eliminating a potential rival for ultimate power? A key to the Revolution's survival would be the ability to institutionalize the revolutionary process. In the 1960s Fidel drifted into reliance on groups that had been born in the insurrection or were created to protect the new regime: the army, the militia, and the Committees for the Defense of the Revolution. The Communist Party was given a greater or lesser role at the initiative of Fidel and the top revolutionary leadership. With the turn toward orthodoxy in the early 1970s, the party assumed new importance. The basic challenge for the revolutionaries was to transform leadership from a tiny elite of guerrilla veterans and party faithful to a growing base of loyal supporters. The most obvious means-and the one that had been used in the Soviet model-was to broaden the base of the Communist Party. In 1975 this process began. Under the banner of "popular participation," grass-roots elections for regional assemblies were held. The idea was to build a representational structure at the local level. Yet by the early 1990s Cubans were still complaining about a highly centralized, bureaucratized, inefficient state apparatus. Power was still concentrated at the top in a structure like the one the East Europeans and Soviets were busily repudiating. Fidel has ruled Cuba as its uncontested leader for more than thirty years, longer than any other current Latin American head of state. As he moved into his fourth decade of power, few Cubans seemed ready to think about a possible successor