YES! Some Second Thoughts by Richard W. Leopold An attempt to determine the origins of America's status as a world power depends on several variables. First of all, the term world power requires qualification because it has different characteristicspolitical and military, of course, but also cultural, economic, and Ideological. Historian Thomas A. Bailey has pointed out that the United States graduated to world status in 1776, an interpretation which is mentioned but dismissed in the first selection. Certainly after 1783 the United States, having gained it~ independence, moved up in the ranks of nations. " The Monroe Doctrine (1823) summarized the United States self-image as a hemispheric power, a point reinforced by openly dismissing the possibility of intervention in European politics. There was, however, a paradox to American hemispheric insularity: considering the massive resources of the Western hemisphere and how long Europe had relied on them, the Monroe Doctrine subtly indicated America's global economic influence. The intrusion of European powers in the New World forced the United States to become actively involved with had conspired with France to reestablish control over its former colonies (France actually did occupy Mexico for five years), the Russians moved into the territories of Oregon and California, and although Britain seemed less of a threat than these others, in 1823' it was still the greatest colonial power in the Western hemisphere. Throughout history there has always been a connection between the occupation of foreign territory and world power. How does this concept apply to the history of the United States? Did the United States become a world power only after the acquisition of territory not directly attached to the nation itself? Could it be argued that the westward expansion Which led to the Pacific, involving as it did diplomatic negotiations with Spain, Russia, and Britain (as well as hostilities with Canada and Mexico), was the initial step in the process of global expansion? The admission of California (1850) and Oregon (1859), together with the purchase of Alaska and the occupation of the Midway Islands (1867), put the date of involvement in the Pacific to mid-century. There were attempts to extend American influence to Asia long before we were willing to be preoccupied in European matters. American commercial interest in China dates from 1784; the initial treaty to facilitate commerce between the two countries was signed in 1844. Ten years later, trading with japan began. The missionaries who spread the Gospel to Asians and Pacific Islanders reflected the cultural. aspect of the United States expansion in the Orient. The first American missionaries in Hawaii arrived in 1820, ten years later American Christians established missions in China. The spectacular characteristics of the SpanishAmerican War dramatically eclipsed the process of expansion in Asia, which actually predates the signing of the United States Constitution by five years, in 1898 the United States finally detached Cuba, one of the last bits of Spanish territory in the New World. The jubilation over this event increased when Spain's major Asian possession, the Philippines tumbled into American hands only three and a half months later. The treaty which ended the war included Puerto Rico and Guam as new American possessions. Addition of the Hawaiian archipelago the same year underscored American determination to augment its power in the Pacific and Asia. ' For Professor Leopold, the last years of the century mark a fundamental change· in the United States from a "continental republic to an overseas empire with possessions in not only the Caribbean and central Pacific, but also the western Pacific and the South China Sea.” Professor LaFeber, in a revisionistic approach to one of the topics, pushes the inception of American expansion further back in time. He writes,”…by the time William Seward became Lincoln's Secretary of State in 1861, a new empire had started to take form.” YES – Leopold, Richard W. The Emergence of America as a World Power: Some Second Thoughts Excerpted from Change and Continuity in Twentieth Century America, Braeman, Bremner, and Walters, editors 1964 Early in 1901 a foreign diplomat declared that, during his brief residence in Washington, he had observed two different nations-the United States before the War with Spain and the United States after that conflict. This remark has been quoted frequently to indicate the profound impact of the contest with Spain upon American foreign policy. According to this interpretation, the "splendid little war:' as that inveterate phrasemaker John Hay called it, did more than terminate the bloodshed in Cuba and liberate the island from Spanish misrule. It also constituted a decisive factor in transforming the continental republic into an overseas empire, an empire with possessions in not only the Caribbean and the central Pacific but also the western pacific and the South China Sea. There can be little doubt that the years 1898 and 1899 formed some sort of watershed in the growth of the role of the United States in world affairs. The passionate debate between the imperialists and the anti-imperialists impressed upon men at the time that the republic had to choose between tradition and innovation. The foes of colonies warned that to embark upon the path of empire would undermine the cherished policy of Isolationism and thrust the country into the maelstrom of international rivalries. Such a departure from old ways would bring needless complications abroad, impede the 496 reform movement at home, enhance the influence of the military in national affairs, and fly in the face of the democratic heritage. Contemporary ·historians likewise concluded that an important change had occurred. In 1903 John Bassett Moore, already an experienced diplomat and recognized student of international law, contributed to the seventh volume of the Cambridge Modern History a chapter entitled "The United States as a World-Power (1885- 1902)." In the winter of 1906-7, Archibald Cary Coolidge; professor of European history at Harvard University, delivered at the Sorbonne a series of lectures which he subsequently published as The United States as a World Power. And in December, 1907, there appeared as the final narrative volume in the ''American Nation" series, which was a cooperative enterprise designed to synthesize the findings of the first generation of the self-styled scientific historians, a book written by John H. Latane of The Johns Hopkins University, bearing the title of America as a World Power, 1897-1907. For the next half-century most writers, scholarly or popular, dated the emergence of the United States as a world power from the late 1890's and attributed to that new status varying degrees of change in American foreign policy. Then, in 1960, the eminent diplomatic historian, Thomas A Bailey, warned against the dangers of repeating clichés and questioned whether the United States had suddenly burst forth as a world power to the thunder of Commodore George Dewey's guns in Manila Bay on May 1, 1898. ln his presidential address before the Pacific Coast Branch of the American Historical Association, Bailey argued that the United States had been a world power since July, 1776. He defined a world power as "a nation with sufficient power in being, or capable of being mobilized, to affect world politics positively and over a period of time?' He pointed out that in territory, population, natural resources, military strength, and moral force the United States met that definition. He also noted that in the century after independence the young republic had exerted its influence in all parts of the globe-In Europe, Asia, and Africa, as well as in the Americas. It had held aloft the torch of democracy and self-determination; it had broken down the commercial exclusiveness of Japan; it had become a granary for Europe. Statesmen of the major powers regarded the United States as part of the global equipoise; citizens of backward nations benefited from the endeavors of American educators and missionaries. The giant of the Western Hemisphere did not live unto itself. Bailey's address was timely but not entirely convincing. It is healthy, of course, to have old concepts challenged. His distinction between a world power and a great power is helpful, although one might question his secondary argument that the United States joined the ranks of great powers at the close of the Civil War. And certainly historians would do well to take a long look backward, to make sure of the actual role of the young republic in world affairs before 1898, if they are to describe accurately its position after that date. But in his own backward glance Bailey seems to have created an occasional straw man ready to be demolished. No reputable scholar maintains that the destruction of Spain's decrepit squadron in Manila Bay and of her more modern vessels off Santiago two months later, in itself, catapulted the United States to worldpower status. Such metamorphoses do not occur overnight. Similarly, it remains to be demonstrated that before 1898 the European chanceries very often considered seriously the response of the government in Washington to the power struggle outside the Westem Hemisphere. The FrancoPrussian War, the clash over the Black Sea Straits, and the contest for empire in Africa are cases in point. As late as 1895, Russia, Germany, and France brought extreme pressure upon Japan during the peace negotiations with China without worrying about the reaction in America. Two developments in the 1890's made the United States a different world power from the kind Bailey describes for the century after 1776. The first was the annexation of distant colonies which gave the nation a stake in the equilibrium of East Asia. Largely for economic reasons-the fear of closed markets and the desire for railroad and mining concessions-a concern for the future of China grew rapidly in the decade between President Grover Cleveland's indifference to the Sino--Japanese fighting over Korea in 1894-95 and President Theodore Roosevelt's peacemaking in the RussoJapanese War of 1904-5. This concern might have come about even if there had been no crusade to free Cuba, but It was certainly hastened by the decision to retain the Philippines. The second development, stemming from the first, was a belief among the people that the country's position had changed for better or for worse. One cannot read Widely in the writings of contemporaries businessmen, educators, clergymen, politicians, and military strategists-without detecting a new note of confidence, a new awareness of leadership, a new realization of the role the republic might play on the global stage. These broadened horizons were evident in newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, consular reports, trade journals, and congressional debates. That the American people accepted the diplomatic consequences of being a world power is, however, another matter. The purpose of this essay is not to fix the exact date on which the United States became a world power or could rightly claim to have become a great power. Rather it seeks to look ahead, beyond the exciting events of 1898-99, to determine what effect this new position had upon subsequent foreign policy. What light do the decades between 1898 and 1917 throw upon change and continuity in twentieth-century America? Do those years mark the end of one era and the start of another? Did the acquisition of colonies bring the advantages the imperialists had promised or the evils their opponents had predicted? Where novel steps taken in world affairs? Which time-honored principles 497 were modified or abandoned? What happened to isolationism, neutrality, the Monroe Doctrine, nonintervention, and other familiar guidelines? There can be no denying that overseas annexations led to and coincided with changes in American foreign policy. The addition of the Hawaiian Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Philippines, Wake, and Tutuila between July 1898, and December 1899, posed unprecedented problems of administration and defense. The triumph of imperialism required the establishment of a colonial agency, the modernization of the army, the redevelopment of the navy, and the institution of inter-service planning. It also caused a reversal In long-standing attitudes toward other great powersEngland, Germany, and Russia at once, Japan a little later… The United States looked like a world power, a1so, in its response to mounting international tensions throughout the globe. For the first time American delegates participated in European conferences to discuss problems of war and peace. They were present at The Hague in 1899 and 1907 to deal with the machinery of arbitration, mediation, and inquiry; with the means of regulating hostilities on land and sea; and with the measures for reducing the burden of arm-aments. They also attended at London, in 1909-10, a gathering which labored to formulate a code of neutral rights and belligerent practices. The United States be-came a member of the misnamed Permanent Court of Arbitration at The Hague in 1899, and eight years later Secretary Root offered a far-sighted plan for a more effective international tribunal. Every administration from Grover Cleveland to Woodrow Wilson searched for a workable predicted? Where novel steps taken in, formula by which the compulsory arbitration of certain classes of disputes might be incorporated in bilateral treaties. But the most dramatic act on the world stage came in 1905 when President Roosevelt employed his good offices to help to bring the Russo-Japanese War to a close and to liquidate, through a multipartite conference at Algeciras, a dangerous Franco-German quarrel over Morocco. Not until May, 1914, when Wilson permitted Colonel Edward M. House to explore in Europe possible means of averting an armed clash between the rival alliance systems did the United States again act so directly to preserve world peace: Once the World War had broken out, Wilson tried constantly to serve as peacemaker-at first, in a disinterested attempt to end the bloodshed; later, in a desperate effort to avoid American involvement. To many people, in 1917, the interventions of the United States in the war seemed a logical consequence of the republic's emergence as a world power. The breakdown of traditional neutrality, the forging of economic entanglements, and the manifestation of passionate attachment to rival belligerents threatened the old indifference to the outcome of a major European conflict. Wilson was unable to apply the customary rules of neutrality without hurting Germany or to Introduce a more realistic code without penalizing England. The sale of munitions and the extension of loans and credits gave American manufacturers and financiers a tangible stake in the battle, while the cotton-grower and wheat-producer feared the loss of a lucrative market on the Continent. The assiduous efforts of rival propagandists to mold American opinion and the apparent commitment of articulate groups to one side or the other frightened the President and undercut his plea of August 19, 1914, for his countrymen to be "Impartial in thought as well as in action!' Thus, where Roosevelt could act as peacemaker in 1905 without any fear of having the nation embroiled if he failed Wilson knew in 1916 that failure would bring involvement. On May 27 of that year, he warned: "We are participants in the life of the world… What affect mankind is inevitably our affair as well as the affair of the nations of Europe and of Asia." How did informed citizens of 1917 interpret American intervention? Wilson's explanation was that the status of a belligerent had been thrust upon the republic. The recent course of imperial Germany, he told Congress on April 2 was "nothing less than war against the government and people of the Unitec States!' Wilson spoke of vindicating maritime rights, violations of which cost American lives, not of insuring an Allied victor~ Otpresewing-aJavorable-equipolse-1r Europe and Asia. Honor, not security, was stressed. But in his much-quoted address the President discussed the alms of intervention as well as the causes, and he sketched the goals for which he asked America to give of her blood and her might. By sublimating a war to uphold national rights into a crusade for all mankind, he bolstered the notion that the Unitec States, In the face of a global cataclysm, was responding as befitted a world power. Others shared Wilson's belief that by April 1917, traditional neutrality was no longer feasible and historic isolationism was both obsolete and unwise. From the outset, Herbert Croly's New Republic had viewed the war in the broadest terms; on November 7, 1914, an editorial had proclaimed "The End of American Isolation!' One of Its foremost writers, Walter Lippmann, supported Intervention because it would maintain Anglo-American control of the Atlantic shipping lanes, a motive he would stress more strongly and with much more validity after June 1940. Lippmann also wanted the United States to enter the war because he felt such a move would aid in creating a league of nations. Many scholars and publicists, such as George Louis Beer, Roland G. Usher, Walter E. Weyl, and H.H. Powers, advocated some form of collective action that would bring to a close this nation's abstention from global responsibility. The foregoing is some evidence for the idea that the triumph of imperialism in 1898-99 led to a reorientation of American' foreign policy. What can be said for the thesis that the acquisition of an overseas empire did not change decisively traditional principles and practices? 498 First, there was the rapid decline in a zeal for colonies. Far from embarking on a big program of annexation, the United States gained, between December 1899, and April 1917, only the Canal Zone and the Danish West Indies. The former was obtained in November 1903, solely to provide a route for the interoceanic canal; the latter, in August 1916, primarily to keep them out of German hands. How do we account for the sudden subsidence of expansionist sentiment? The battle waged by the anti-imperialists in 1899 and 1900 was partly responsible. The insurrection in the Philippines, with the shocking atrocities on both sides, was also a factor. But the best explanation lies in the nature of the imperialist impulse. On neither economic nor strategic grounds did the United States in 1898 need outposts in the western Pacific. American industrialists and bankers did not require dependencies in which to sell surplus manufactures or to invest surplus capital. The urge for colonies under McKinley was, as Walter E. Weyl asserted in April,1917, "an unripe imperialism." Its roots were largely emotional; and when those emotions found an outlet in a successful war, the movement withered. In the Caribbean, to be sure, the strategic roots of imperialism nourished the growth of protectorates, but these last represented a limited and temporary type of control. And they posed less difficult problems of defense than did the Philippines located 6,000 miles from San Francisco. Revealing, too, was the failure to create a central colonial office. Supervision of the lands acquired in 1898 and afterward was divided. The Navy Department took over the smaller islands of Guam and Tutuila and, later, of St. Thomas, St. John, and St. Croix. The War Department governed the Canal Zone directly but handled the Philippines and, after 1909, Puerto Rico through a Bureau of Insular Affairs. Hawaii enjoyed territorial status and came nominally under the Interior Department. Uninhabited Wake, like Midway, required no formal rule. The Bureau of Insular Affairs had the makings of a colonial office, but its authority was too restricted. To some persons, it seemed handicapped by being in the War Department under an army officer rather than in the State Department under a civilian. Significantly, both Congress and the public quickly lost interest in colonial problems; despite prodding by the executive, Congress passed few important laws dealing with the new possessions from 1902 to 1916. Equally disappointing was the Inability of the army and navy to meet fully the challenges of world power. The reforms urged by Secretary of War Root between 1901 and 1903 could have come - indeed should have come - whether or not the United States acquired colonies. An Increase in the authorized strength of the ground forces, the abolition of permanent assignments to staff posts in Washington, the revival of the special-service schools, the creation of an Army War College, the overhaul of the antiquated militia system, and the establishment of a general staff corps were changes long overdue. Yet Root merely scratched the surface of the deep-seated evils of the militia system, and his general staff corps had to undergo further development before It operated efficiently. Nor did Root do everything that was necessary. He deferred the tactical reorganization of the field troops, and his attempt to secure co-ordination with the navy was confined to an ineffectual Joint ArmyNavy Board, founded in July, 1903. Although the army made more progress in the fifteen years before Sarajevo than in the thirty after Appomattox, it did not keep pace with its European counterparts and was never prepared to discharge completely the increased functions that came with empire. The same can be said of the navy. Superficially that service was less in need of change. It had performed brilliantly against Spain and had escaped the scandals which plagued the War Department. Still, with new doctrines and tactics being adopted across the Atlantic and with new responsibilities for colonies being faced across the Pacific, the navy could not depend upon its existing loose command structure. In a typical compromise between tradition and innovation, Secretary John D. Long created by departmental order on March 13, 1900, a General Board, composed of nine officers and presided over by the Admiral of the Navy, a rank revived for Dewey. The General Board's main duties were to draft war plans, study construction, recommend additional facilities and deployment, and counsel the secretary. Its role, however, was purely advisory. It issued no orders and, lacking legislative sanction, could be abolished by any future secretary. It was better than anything that had gone before, but it was not enough. In 1909 Secretary George von Lengerke Meyer instituted the aide system which placed four officers, responsible to him, in charge of fleet operations, personnel, material, and inspection. Not until Congress enacted statutes in 1915 and 1916 for an Office of the Chief of Naval Operations did the sea arm possess anything resembling the general-staff principle. More serious still was the navy's incapability of protecting some of the colonies acquired in 1898. Contrary to' the claims of the expansionists, certain islands notably the Philippines-weakened rather than strengthened the military position of the United States. The reasons were two in number. First, the fleet was never big enough or balanced enough to control the sea lanes stretching from the Caribbean to the western Pacific. Second, the vessels that were available lacked safe anchorages and repair facilities in distant waters. For these deficiencies the Congress was largely, though by no means entirely, to blame. Measured by the yardstick of the past, the record of the legislature seemed satisfactory. Appropriations rose steadily from $48,099,969 for the fiscal year 1900 to $149,763,563 for fiscal 1916. By 1907 the United States Navy ranked second only to Great Britain in total tonnage. But to improve upon the nineteenth century was not enough for a world power, and figures can mislead. 499 The commissioning late in 1906 of H.M.S. "Dreadnought' the first all big-gun battleship, rendered obsolete every existing battleship and compelled nations to start building afresh. This event coincided with a growing opposition to Roosevelt's construction policy, an opposition that caused the United States to lose ground as the Anglo-German race quickened. Since most admirals wished to allot the bulk of available funds to dreadnoughts, the American fleet soon found Itself sorely lacking in cruisers, battle and scout, and badly trailing in destroyers, submarines, and auxiliaries. Not until August 1916, did Congress pass, under pressure from the advocates of preparedness, a three-year program designed to achieve a well-rounded fleet that would be second to none. The want of adequate overseas bases can be explained on several grounds. One was the decline of popular interest in the colonies. A second was congressional apathy or, perhaps, a reluctance of the lawmakers to devote funds to installations which did not benefit their constituents directly. There was more enthusiasm on Capitol Hill for installations inside the continental United States than outside. Finally, the army and navy could not agree on the location of the main base in the Philippines. The navy desired Olongapo on Subic Bay; the army, Cavite on Manila Bay. This interservice quarrel reached a climax just before Roosevelt left the White House. On November 11, 1909, William Howard Taft endorsed a recommendation from the Joint Board that no major base be established in the Pacific west of Hawaii and that efforts be concentrated on Pearl Harbor. This decision accepted a fact which had become evident in the preceding years, that the Imperial Japanese Navy dominated the area beyond the International Date Line. If after 1899 colonial and military practice revealed the limits within which the new world power must operate, a similar hesitation can be detected in its policy in East Asia. The goal of the open door, as defined by Hay on July 3, 1900, remained constant, but the obstacles to Its realization grew more formidable. First Russia, the Japan, and then the two antagonists in concert infringed upon the territorial Integrity of China and violated the principle of equal commercial opportunity for all. Roosevelt's peacemaking in 1905 marked the end of an era with Japan. In the ensuing decade an intermittent controversy over immigration, a muted rivalry over sea power, and an open clash over economic rights in Manchuria indicated how fully the vital interests of both nations were in conflict. And in the years before the First World War, as in those after it, the American people and their elected representatives were unwilling to put force behind their avowed policy in the Orient. No one stated the dilemma better than a leading expansionist of 1898. Writing to Taft on December 22, 1910, former President Roosevelt said: Our vital Interest Is to keep the Japanese out of our country and at the same time to preserve the good will of Japan. The vital interest of the Japanese, on the other hand, Is in Manchuria and Korea. It Is therefore peculiarly our interest not to take any steps as regards Manchuria which will give the Japanese cause to feel, with or without reason, that we are hostile to them, or a menace-In however slight a degree to their Interests. Alliance with China, in view of China's absolute military helplessness, means of course not an additional strength to us, but an additional obligation.... As regards Manchuria, If the Japanese choose to follow a course of conduct to which we are adverse, we cannot stop it unless we are prepared to go to war, and a successful war about Manchuria would require a fleet as good as that of England, plus an army as good as that of Germany. The "open-door" policy in China was an excellent thing, and will I hope be a good thing in the future, so far as It can be maintained by general diplomatic agreement; but as has been proved by the whole history of Manchuria, alike under Russia and under Japan, the "open-door" policy, as a matter of fact, completely disappears as soon as a powerful nation determines to disregard it, and is willing to run the risk of war rather than forego its intention. Roosevelt's cautious realism did not go unheeded. Secretary Knox had already accepted without protest Japan's absorption of Korea on August 29, 1910, and after one failure he did not again seek to upset the Russo-Japanese domination of the Manchurian railway system. In May 1915, after Bryan's vacillation during the crisis precipitated by the twenty-one demands Japan presented to China in January, Wilson did strive, and with some success, to keep to a minimum the con-cessions wrung from the government at Peking. But the future of the open door was still unclear when, after the United States entered the war, Lansing and Kikijuro Ishii temporarily smoothed over mutual differences in an ambiguous executive agreement of November 2, 1917. In the Western Hemisphere the triumph of imperialism did not transform American policy. The developments after 1899 were more a consummation than a change. There it was possible for the United States to play a more active role without departing from traditional isolationism or neutrality. What had been breached was the principle of not interfering in the internal affairs of other nations. The first instance came in Spain's Cuban colony in April 1898; subsequent actions under the Roosevelt Corollary or special treaties with Cuba and Panama also violated a historic noninterventionism. Beginning in 1906, however, the men in Washington sought to allay suspicion and promote hemispheric cordiality. In that year 500 Secretary Root made an unprecedented goodwill tour of South America and attended the Third International Conference of American States at Rio de Janeiro. In 1907 he did much to see that eighteen New World republics participated in the Second Hague Conference. Indeed, he had been largely responsible for delaying that meeting for one year so that It would not conflict with the gathering at Rio. In 1907, too, the United States and Mexico sponsored a Central American Peace Conference at Washington, and in 1912 Secretary Knox visited ten Caribbean countries. The advent of the Democrats brought even more strenuous efforts to forge a good-neighbor policy. "One of the chief objects of my Administration:' Wilson asserted on March 11, 1913, "will be to cultivate the friendship and deserve the confidence of our sister republics!' At Mobile on October 27, he promised: "The United States will never again seek one additional foot of territory by conquest. During 1914 Wilson and Edward M. House drew up a four-point Pan-American pact which contained many ideas he later wrote into the League of Nations Covenant. It guaranteed the territorial integrity of the signatories, required an amicable settlement of all pending boundary disputes, made obligatory the use of arbitration or inquiry in certain types of controversies, and experimented with an arms embargo to keep the peace. But the outbreak of the World War prevented serious consideration of the project, while several moves by Wilson and William Jennings Bryan marred this quest for interAmerican harmony. The most serious of these was. the creation of a fifth protectorate in Haiti, further interference in the Dominican Republic, and an entanglement in the revolution and counterrevolution in Mexico. There were limits, also, to how far the United States would go in helping avert wars. From 1899 to 1914, the republic broke new ground by attending the two Hague Conferences, by facilitating peacemaking at Portsmouth, by concerning itself with a quarrel over Morocco, and by negotiating numerous treaties requiring the arbitration of certain kinds of disputes. Yet never did the government tie its hands for the future, commit itself irrevocably to a course of action, or sur-render an iota of sovereignty. In consenting to the Act of Algeciras of April 7, 1906, and to The Hague Convention of October 18, 1907, the Senate added reservations designed to maintain inviolate the Monroe Doctrine and the policy of isolationism. The first of these disclaimed any intention "to depart from the traditional American foreign policy which forbids participation by the United States in the settlement of political questions -which are entirely European in their scope." The second insisted that "nothing contained in this convention shall be so construed as to require the United States of America to depart from Its traditional policy of not intruding upon, interfering with, or entangling itself in the political questions of policy or internal administration of any foreign state; nor shall anything contained in the said convention be construed to imply a relinquishment by the United States of its traditional attitude toward purely American questions." The only bilateral arbitration agreements to pass the Senate exempted disputes affecting "the vital interests, the independence, or the honor" of the signatories and disputes concerning the Interests of third parties. Differences of a legal nature and those relating to the interpretation of a treaty alone had to be arbitrated. Two outstanding Republicans clearly defined the commitment of the United States to world peace in this period. "In all these matters where I am asked to interfere between two foreign nations:' Roosevelt wrote to Ambassador Whitelaw Reid in London on August 3, 1905, "all I can do is this. If there is a chance to prevent trouble by preventing simple misunderstanding, or by myself taking the first step ... when it has become a matter of punctilio with the two parties . . . then I am entirely willing and glad to see if I can be of any value in preventing the misunderstanding from becoming acute to the danger point. If, however, there is a genuine conflict of Interest which had made each party resolute to carry its point even at the cost of war, there is no use of my interfering ...." On January 24, 1906, Henry Cabot Lodge defended in the Senate Roosevelt's dispatch of representatives to Algeclras. "The policy and Interest of the United States alike demand the peace of the world,” he said, "and it is not to be supposed for a moment that we are never to exert our great moral in-fluence or to use our good offices for the maintenance of the world’s peace…In entangling alliances, of course, no man wants to engage this country; we have no concern with the wars of Europe; no one for a moment would think of engaging us In a position where we might be Involved in them . . . but . . . the phrase 'entangling alliances' does not mean that we should not unite with other nations on commercial questions ... or in the promotion of those great and beneficent objects which are embodied in international conventions." The presence of American delegates, he concluded, "will make for the advancement of our commerce in Morocco and will also make for what is infinitely more important, the peace of the world.” Did the experience of the years from 1914 to 1917 persuade the American people to enlarge that commitment? Did they agree with Wilson that neutrality was "no longer feasible or desirable where the peace of the world is concerned"? Did they endorse his "concert of free people:' his league of nations, as a war aim? The evidence is overwhelming that they did not. In April 1917, Wilson and his associates, as well as intellectuals like Lippmann and Weyl, were in a minority. Few citizens feared that Germany would wrest control of the Atlantic; not even the President or his secretary of the navy knew at that time of the alarming inroads the submarine was making on British shipping. The war on land appeared to be a stalemate, with little prospect of a German victory. 501 An invasion of American soil seemed very unlikely. With considerable reluctance and an air of resignation, most America-ns concurred in Wilson's assertion that "the right is more precious than peace" and that they must "accept gage of battle with this natural foe to liberty." The debate in Congress revealed how few legislators followed the President beyond his immediate goals – the defense of American rights and the destruction of Prussian autocracy. A handful of critics, like Senators Robert M. La Follette and George W. Norris or Representatives Claude Kitchin and Fred A. Britten, rejected Wilson's basic premise, arguing that the United States should have and could have stayed out. They would have denied that America's emergence as a world power obligated her to fight in order to preserve the existing order in Europe or in Asia. The more ardent Republican interventionists, like Lodge or Senator James W. Wadsworth, carefully refrained from supporting the league-of-nations idea. They appealed rather for bipartisanship in a war against the forces of barbarism. They were the ones most likely to recognize the need for a changed foreign policy; they reflected the views of Roosevelt, Hay, Root, and others who had shaped the course of the Imperial republic after 1898. Most of this group favored a postwar alliance with England and France but said little on that point in April 1917. Still other Republicans, and a few Democrats, stood closer to La Follette and Norris on the best policy for the future. While ready to vindicate national honor by armed force, they saw no need to depart from traditional practices after the guns were stilled. Thus Senator Warren G. Harding Insisted that he was "not voting for war in the name of democracy" but rather in behalf of "the maintenance of just American rights." William E. Borah was more explicit in separating the quarrel with Germany from the creation of a future league. There can be, he told the Senate, "but one sufficient reason for commlttin9 this country to war, and that is the honor and security of our own people and our own Nation.... I join no crusade; I seek or accept no alliances; I obligate this Government to no other power. I make war alone for my countrymen and their rights, for my country and its honor." Certainly the subsequent battle over the Versailles Treaty disclosed a widespread unwillingness to join Wilson in proclaiming the abandonment of Isolationism and neutrality. The rejection of the League Covenant cannot be attributed, as It often has been, solely to personal enmities, partisan rivalries, and parochial outlooks. In seeking to break with the past, the Pres-dent moved too far, too fast. The American people were not prepared to assume the moral leadership he asked of them or to embrace the type of collective security he envisaged. In 1920, as in 1898, the average citizen thought the United States could be a world power and still adhere to practices of an earlier day. In the Inter-lude between the two World Wars, the policymakers had to settle for a compromise between traditional nineteenth century principles and Wilson's more ambitious objectives. These leaders reflected the experience of 1898 to 1917 by taking unprecedented steps to achieve regional nonaggression pacts, arms-control agreements, membership in an international court, and pledges to renounce war as an instrument of national policy. They also eliminated some of the excrescences of the imperialist adventure. But they were still loath to forge permanent alliances or to promise in advance to use armed force in a future crisis, even though the new world power of 1898 had become the Old World's creditor of 1921. It would take the lessons learned from the futility of that compromise and from the agony of 1940 to 1945 to effect a true revolution in American foreign policy. As we look back from the troubled present, we can see more clearly than did the older historians that the emergence of the United States as a world power after the clash with Spain and the Interwar compromise after the struggle against Germanywhile representing change-were at most transitional stages in a process that culminated in the global commitments and constant Involvement which characterize American foreign policy today. 502 Debate: Was 1898 The Decisive Year for the US as a World Power? NO! Years of Preparation, 1860-1889 By Walter Lefeber An attempt to determine the origins of America's status as a world power depends on several variables. First of all, the term world power requires qualification because it has different characteristics-political and military, of course, but also cultural, economic, and Ideological. Historian Thomas A. Bailey has pointed out that the United States graduated to world status in 1776, an interpretation which is mentioned but dismissed in the first selection. Certainly after 1783 the United States, having gained its independence, moved up in the ranks of nations. " The Monroe Doctrine (1823) summarized the United States self-image as a hemispheric power, a point reinforced by openly dismissing the possibility of intervention in European politics. There was, however, a paradox to American hemispheric insularity: considering the massive resources of the Western hemisphere and how long Europe had relied on them, the Monroe Doctrine subtly indicated America's global economic influence. The intrusion of European powers in the New World forced the United States to become actively involved with had conspired with France to reestablish control over its former colonies (France actually did occupy Mexico for five years), the Russians moved into the territories of Oregon and California, and although Britain seemed less of a threat than these others, in 1823 it was still the greatest colonial power in the Western hemisphere. Throughout history there has always been a connection between the occupation of foreign territory and world power. How does this concept apply to the history of the United States? Did the United States become a world power only after the acquisition of territory not directly attached to the nation itself? Could it be argued that the westward expansion Which led to the Pacific, involving as it did diplomatic negotiations with Spain, Russia, and Britain (as well as hostilities with Canada and Mexico), was the initial step in the process of global expansion? The admission of California (1850) and Oregon (1859), together with the purchase of Alaska and the occupation of the Midway Islands (1867), put the date of involvement in the Pacific to mid-century. There were attempts to extend American influence to Asia long before we were willing to be preoccupied in European matters. American commercial interest in China dates from 1784; the initial treaty to facilitate commerce between the two countries was signed in 1844. Ten years later, trading with japan began. The missionaries who spread the Gospel to Asians and Pacific Islanders reflected the cultural. aspect of the United States expansion in the Orient. The first American missionaries in Hawaii arrived in 1820, ten years later American Christians established missions in China. The spectacular characteristics of the SpanishAmerican War dramatically eclipsed the process of expansion in Asia, which actually predates the signing of the United States Constitution by five years, in 1898 the United States finally detached Cuba, one of the last bits of Spanish territory in the New World. The jubilation over this event increased when Spain's major Asian possession, the Philippines tumbled into American hands only three and a half months later. The treaty which ended the war included Puerto Rico and Guam as new American possessions. Addition of the Hawaiian archipelago the same year underscored American determination to augment its power in the Pacific and Asia. ' For Professor Leopold, the last years of the century mark a fundamental change· in the United States from a "continental republic to an overseas empire with possessions in not only the Caribbean and central Pacific, but also the western Pacific and the South China Sea.” Professor LaFeber, in a revisionistic approach to one of the topics, pushes the inception of American expansion further back in time. He writes,”…by the time William Seward became Lincoln's Secretary of State in 1861, a new empire had started to take form.” NO Lafeber, Walter Years of Preparation, 1860-1889 Reprinted from Walter Lafeber: The New Empire: An Interpretation of American Expansion, 1860-1898. (1963) Modern American diplomatic history began in the 1850's and 1860's. By then the continental empire of which Madison, Jefferson, and John Quincy Adams had dreamed spanned North America from sea to sea. Cords of rails and water, common economic and social interests, and a federal political system tied the empire together. Edmund Burke had stated the principle: “An empire is the aggregate of many states under one common head, whether this head be a monarch or a presiding republic." But by the time William Seward became Lincoln's Secretary of State in 1861, a new empire had started to take form. Two important features distinguished it from the old. First, with the completion of the continental conquest, Americans moved with increasing authority into such extracontinental areas as Hawaii, Latin America, Asia, and Africa. Second, the form of expansion changed. Instead of searching for farming, mineral, or grazing lands, Americans sought foreign markets for agricultural staples or industrial goods. In the late 1840's American export figures began their rapid climb to the dizzying heights of the twentieth century. Between 1850 and 1873, despite an almost nonexistent export trade during the Civil War, exports averaged $274,000,000 annually; the yearly average during the 1838-1849 period had been only $116,000,000. 503 As these figures indicate, the United States was not isolated from the rest of the world in the years 1850-1873. When examined in economic and ideological terms, the familiar story of American isolation becomes a myth. It is true, however, that from the end of the Napoleonic Wars until the 1890's the vast Atlantic sheltered America from many European problems. Many problems, but not all, for even before the 1890's the United States became involved in such episodes as the international slave trade, Latin-American revolutions, numerous incidents in Asia with the major powers of the world, and even colonial questions in Africa and Madagascar. External factors, such as England's command of the seas and the balance of power in Europe, might have given the United States the luxury of almost total isolation; but internal developments, as interpreted by American policy makers, led the United States to become increasingly involved in world affairs. The economic revolution, new scientific and ideological concepts, and the policy makers' views of these changes had begun to accelerate this involvement before the Civil War. This development is sometimes overlooked, since economic and ideological expansion are often considered apart from political entanglements. American history, of course, belies such a separation, for the United States annexed a continental empire by undermining, economically and ideologically, British, French, Spanish, Mexican, and Indian control and then taking final possession with money, bullets, or both. Similarly, one rule may be suggested which particularly helps in under-standing the course of American foreign policy in the nineteenth century: the United States could not obtain either continental or overseas economic benefits without paying a political and often a military price. Economic expansion and political involvement became so interlinked that by 1900 a reinvigorated Monroe Doctrine, participation in an increasing number of international conferences, and a magnificent battleship fleet necessarily made explicit America's world-wide political commitments. . . . THE ROOTS OF THE NEW EMPIRE Long before the 1860's Americans had been involved in the affairs of Canada, Latin America, Hawaii, and Asia. In its first moments of independence, the United States had struck quickly and unsuccessfully in an effort to bring into the new nation the territory north and east of the Great Lakes. The Americans failed no less miserably in their second try during the War of 1812. But two strikes were not out, and time and again in the first half of the nineteenth century Americans tried more subtle measures for adding Canada to the Union. The carrot of trade replaced the stick of war when in 1854 the United States and Canada entered into a reciprocity treaty which many Americans hoped would tie the northern nation to them with unbreakable economic bonds. When the treaty tended instead to strengthen Canadian autonomy, a disgusted American Senate allowed the agreement to terminate in 1866. The United States did not attempt to annex Latin America as it did Canada, but there was no lack of interest in the southern continent. Jefferson had declared that North America would be the nest from which the entire Western Hemisphere would be peopled. Henry Clay later admonished the United States to put itself at the head of the entire hemisphere through a "Good Neighborhood" policy. Increasing interest in Latin-American markets as replacements for those lost with the closing of the Napoleonic Wars in Europe provided adequate material reasons. In a negative sense, the Monroe Doctrine, as formulated by President James Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, had tried to exclude European powers from affairs in this hemisphere. Viewed positively, the Doctrine staked out the hemisphere as an area for future American economic opportunities and de facto political control. In the mid-1890's an American Secretary of State would announce the positive aspects of the Doctrine in blunt terms. The annexation of Texas in 1845, which had formerly been a part of Mexico, the war with Mexico in 1846-1848, which resulted in the enlargement of the United States by one-fifth, and the numerous filibustering expeditions into Central America in the 1850's only partially indicated American interest in lands south of the border. Also to the south lay Cuba, an island which Jefferson had considered annexing as early as 1808 and which John Quincy Adams delayed taking only because he believed that the "laws of political . . . gravitation" demanded that Cuba, like "an apple, severed by the tempest from its native tree:' would "gravitate only towards the North American Union?' By the 1850's Cuba had refused to fall in spite of increased American interest, so three distinguished United States envoys to Europe decided to shake the tree. Failing to persuade Spain to sell the Island, they issued the Ostend Manifesto, which proclaimed the right of the United States to island if Spain would not sell it. Washington, however, quickly disavowed the Manifesto. Such expansionist projects failed in the 1850's, not because they were unpopular, but because too many of them were advocated by men who spoke with the drawl of southern slaveholders. Even such northern expansionists as Seward refused to cooperate in attempts to extend the slavocracy. American attention had also turned to the Pacific. Trading and whaling vessels from Massachusetts had early stamped the Hawaiian Islands as outposts of United States trade. New England missionaries established colonies during the 1820's. Soon American interests grew from within as well as from without. In the 1840's the United States began sending notices to England and France (the mailing list would later include Germany and Japan) that it would not tolerate European control of the islands. By the decade before the Civil War, the American 504 Secretary of State, William L. Marcy, tried to negotiate a treaty of annexation with Hawaii, was outsmarted by the antiannexationist block in Honolulu, and retreated with the warning that future annexation by the United States was "Inevitable?' More than forty years later William McKinley would say, while successfully annexing the islands, that his action was "the inevitable consequence" of "three-quarters of a century" of American expansion into the Pacific. By the time of the Civil War, the Monroe Doctrine had been implicitly extended as far as Hawaii, but important American interests were developing still farther west. (Textbooks call the Orient the Far East, but this hinders the understanding of American expansion, for the United States has more often considered this area as the Far West.) The "Empress of China" had sailed out of New York City in 1784 to make the first important contact. The United States signed its first commercial treaty with China in 1844. Ten years later Commodore Matthew C. Perry opened Japan. By the time Seward assumed his duties as Secretary of State, the United States had been caught in the web of Asian power politics. The State Department had to maintain trade privileges and safeguard traders and missionaries either by cooperating with the European powers or by developing a go-it-alone policy. Americans debated only the means, not the fact of involvement. THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION United States interest in these extracontinental areas intensified after 1850 with the completion of the continental empire and the maturation of the American industrial economy. Between 1850 and 1900 this industrial complex rapidly developed into one of the two greatest economic forces in the world. During the same half-century the United States battled with other industrial nations for control of the Latin-American, Asian, and African markets. It was not accidental that Americans built their new empire at the same time their industrial complex matured… This does not mean that the Civil War was unimportant as a cause of this burgeoning industrial sector. It was important, but in a political and social sense. Charles Beard caught an important aspect of the conflict when he noted that it marked the shift of political power from planters to the industrialists and financiers. The legislation passed by the northem – and eastern – dominated war Congresses included a measure for stronger central banking, high tariffs for budding (and blossomed) industries, the Homestead Act to develop Interior markets and provide new opportunities speculative capital, the giving of millions of acres and generous loans to build rail links between the Industries In the East and Midwest and the growing markets of the West, and a contract labor law which allowed employers to import cheap foreign labor. During the Civil War, then, industrialists received political help of no small value, but the fact remains that the manufacturers simply used these benefits to build a superstructure (though it was towering) on a solid foundation which had, been constructed before the war. These two facts-that by 1860 the industrial economy was already moving ahead rapidly and that the Civil War marked the transference of power from planters to industrialists and financiers do much to explain the dynamics of the new empire. The roots of this empire date back at least to the 1843-1860 period, which climaxed in the taking off of the economy, for during this era eastern industrial interests, working through such men as Daniel Webster and William Marcy, began showing interest in the vast China market and in such areas as California and Hawaii to serve as stepping-stones to that market. William Seward, rising to a lofty position in American politics during the 1850's, developed an expansive philosophy within the context of this industrialism which he attempted to realize during the next decade. Policy makers in the post-1870's completed what these men had begun, but the later empire builders succeeded because the Civil War had given them the political power to carry out their plans. The control of policy making by the industrialists and financiers was a prerequisite to the creation of a new commercial empire in such noncontiguous areas as China and South America. The United States thus developed into a great industrial power, but it paid a big price for the privilege. As efficient machines produced more and more industrial and agricultural goods, consumption could not maintain the pace. The resulting deflation needed only the impetus derived from a few failures of large banks or Wall Street firms to push the economy into a full-scale depression. In the twentyfive years after 1873, half were years of depression: 1873-1878, 1882-1885, and 18931897. As each panic struck, Americans became convinced that the new one was worse than the last. 'Although they believed the 1893-1897 crisis to be most destructive, and although it did have the greatest impact on the formulation of foreign policy, economists have demonstrated that the depression of the 1870's was actually the worst. If the 1873 general price index is figured as 100, then the index took a precipitous drop to 77 in the next few years. In the 1880's it again fell from 87 to 76 and from 78 In 1890 to 71 In 1894 and 1896. The break in the early eighties was especially sharp. Agricultural prices fell when good European crops combined with still greater American wheat production in 1881 and 1882. Industrial prices followed suit. Between 1880 and 1884 business failures tripled in number to almost 12,000 annually. The economy would not stand upright again until after 1897. Carroll D. Wright, first United States Commissioner of Labor, reported in 1888: "The day of large profits Is probably past.... The market price of products will continue low:' In some respects, however, the mushrooming industrial economy fed upon these depressions. In 505 discussing the 1873 panic Andrew Carnegie later acknowledged: "So many of my friends needed money, that they begged me to repay them. I did so and bought out five or six of them. That was what gave me my leading interest in this steel business:' After buying the Homestead plant during the 1883 economic downturn, Carnegie could justifiably comment, "I've enjoyed this f1urry after all:' Out of this expanded and productive plant would come vast amounts of steel, much of which sought foreign markets in the 1890's because of Insufficient demand at home. It was truly twenty years of boom hidden in twenty years of crisis. This Industrial power also began to affect the historic flow of International finance capital. Foreign investments continued to expand in the United States un-til they reached the mountainous figure of $3,300,000,000 In 1899, but this tells only part of the story. During these years more and more money moved from the United States to Europe. As capital accumulated from the profits of the American Industrial Revolution, much of it went back into new machinery and plants in the United States, but some flowed into Latin America, Canada, Asia, and Europe, and other dollars went to London and Paris to buy back American stocks at panic prices. This trend was especially noticeable during the slump in the 1890's. In other words, the United States began measuring Itself for Britain's shoes: exporting more than importing, and making up the difference by buying back American securities, purchasing foreign stocks and bonds, and building American-owned transportation systems and Industries abroad. The Importance of this industrial power was just becoming apparent by the time of the Civil War, but agricultural surpluses had played a key' role in the nation's foreign relations ever since Maryland and Virginia planters had tried to find markets outside the British Empire for the rich tobacco harvests in the seventeenth century. By 1870 the American economy depended so much upon foreign markets for the agricultural surplus that the economy's ups and downs for the next thirty years can be traced in large measure to the success or failure of marketing each year's wheat and cotton crops. No. matter how many markets could be found, more always seemed to be needed. With the opening of vast new lands after 1865 and under the impact of farm mechanization, the production of wheat and cotton soared beyond all previous figures. In 1870 the United States produced 4,300,000 bales of cotton; by 1882 it counted 6,900,000 bales, and in 1891 it grew 9,000,000 bales. Prices meanwhile dropped from 18 cents per pound in 1871 to 10 cents in 1880 and to a little over 7 cents in 1891. Wheat figures tell the same story. From 1873 to 1882 wheat production jumped from 368,000,000 to 555,000,000 bushels, while exports soared from 40,000,000 to 150,000,000 bushels. But prices slumped from $1.52 per bushel in 1866 to 77 cents in 1878, moved back up to $1.19 in 1881, and then sunk to 68 cents in 1887 and 54 cents in 1893. Between 1869 and 1900 the home market bought between 7% and 8% of the total value of farm products, but the most important items of cotton, tobacco, and wheat depended much more on foreign markets. Cotton exports, for example, fluctuated between 6% and 8% of the total crop, and tobacco exports accounted for 4% to 7% of total production. If foreign markets meant good instead of mediocre or poor profits for some industrialists, adequate markets abroad meant the difference between being solvent or bankrupt to many farmers. WESTWARD THE COURSE OF EMPIRE AND DISCONTENT Historians have long fixed the 18651877 period as the era of Reconstruction. For some chroniclers, such as those concerned with the history of the South, this demarcation has certain values. But for historians of American diplomacy this emphasis on the South can entice them to take their eyes off events during these years which had more importance in the malting of foreign policy. Certainly the energy and time devoted to waving the bloody shirt in the 1870's did divert some attention from external affairs; and no doubt the beginnings of industrialism in the South deserve attention since many southern Industrialists soon joined their compatriots in the North in the search for foreign markets. All this can be granted and the point can still be emphasized that, as far as the Internal dynamics of American foreign policy are concerned, the most important events occurred outside the South. When coupled with the maturing of the economy, especially in the industrial segment, America's western history provides valuable insights into the formulation of foreign policy after Seward. This is so for several reasons. First, the American West supposedly held the great open frontier of opportunities for both individual farmers seeking land and for eastern and midwestern industrialists searching for markets and raw materials. When in the 1880's many Americans feared that this frontier was closing, they reacted in the classic manner of searching farther west for new frontiers, though primarily of a commercial, not landed, nature. This swept them into the Pacific and Asiatic area and hence into one of the maelstroms of world power politics. Second, when the belief spread that the internal frontier had quit expanding and had begun to stagnate, the newly restored Union faced an intensified internal threat. This came from bankrupt farmers, unemployed laborers and miners, and bitter social critics including some of the foremost novelists of the day. Foreign policy formulators and many businessmen viewed expanding diplomatic interests as one way to ameliorate the causes of this discontent. At the beginning of the Reconstruction period Americans saw the area west of the Mississippi as a vast land of limitless opportunities which, they believed, would be open for many years. Horace Greeley's New York Tribune in April, 1865, gloried 506 in the fact that "our country had already an ample area for the next century at least:' The Chicago Tribune boasted at the same time, "We have already more territory than we can people in fifty years:' Pioneer farmers earlier had shied from moving into the treeless Great Plains area, but they now received assurance from no less a person than the director of the Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories that although the area just east of the Rockies might resemble a desert, this could be corrected through sett1ement, plowing, and the planting of trees. Farmers, cattlemen, and speculators took such statements at face value. Americans settled more land during the thirty years after 1870 than they had during the entire three hundred years before. Four new trunk railways formed an iron link with the Pacific; the booming cattle industry and bonanza wheat farms sprouted new fortunes. These gigantic granaries structured themselves for agricultural production as corporations had organized for industrial production, a significant fact for a supposedly raw frontier. Linus P. Brockett reported in Our Western Empire (1881) that his area was “destined to be the garden of the' world." If farmers thought of this as a new frontier, so did persons in the East who had their own or European money to invest. Money poured into the West. To cite but one example, twelve million dollars settled in the Wyoming cattle industry in the single year of 1883. Brockett had no doubt that this was the "grandest empire this world has ever seen.” By the 1880's, however, the weeds of discontent began to clutter this garden of the world. Supposedly limitless frontiers started to snap shut on every side. A resurgence of good European wheat crops after 1881 forced agricultural prices downward until the cost of raising wheat amounted to one-third more than its selling price. Not accidentally, the two most important agrarian revolts, those of the Grangers and the Populists, derived much strength from areas where crops of wheat and cotton depended on the world market. A horrible winter in 1885-1886 and the 1886-1887 freeze nearly ruined the range cattle Industry. Between 1888 and 1892 half the population of western Kansas filtered out to search for new opportunities. At the same time the death rattle of the railroad frontier could be heard. By 1886 railroad construction had virtually halted. In 1875 half the iron produced in the United States had found its market in the American railroad system, and by 1880, 200,000 men had earned their living working on railroad construction. In the mid1880's many of these workers had to search for other jobs. Iron industrialists were forced to find new markets at the same time their blast furnaces were increasing output from an annual average of forty-five tons in 1860 to four hundred tons in 1905. Brockett had feared that the great wealth of the West would lure settlers away from education and other "civilizing influences" and turn them into followers of any man on a horse. When the men on horseback appeared in the persons of General James B. Weaver of the Populist Party and William Jennings Bryan in 1896, westerners flocked to them because of poverty and panic, not wealth. One of the most acute observers of this or any other period of American history had warned of such dangers. Henry Adams writing in 1870, noted that a "loose and separately responsible division of government" suited the expanding United States of 1800. But, he said, with the nature of the Union rapidly changing, "all indications now point to the conclusion that this system is outgrown!' True, statistics penned on paper could demonstrate that hourly wages for wage earners in all industries almost doubled in the thirty years after 1860, although they declined somewhat in the 1890's. Real wages rose in an even more spectacular fashion according to the statisticians. produce another series of strikes. This time But statisticians could not reconcile such figures with the organization of the first American Socialist party in the decade after the Civil War or with the violent railroad strikes of 1877. During the chaotic summer of 1877 many agreed with Jay Gould, who thought he saw the beginnings of "a great social revolution!' United States Judge Walter Quintin Gresham, who remembered the nightmarish times of 1877 when he formulated foreign policy for Grover Cleveland in 1893-1895, wrote a friend immediately after the strike: "Our revolutionary fathers ... went too far with their notions of popular government. Democracy is now the enemy of law & order.” By 1879 the United States was emerging from the fearful period which had followed the 1873 panic, but the scars remained. Many Americans who had unquestioningly accepted the results of the Civil War as insurance for an indefinite period of American greatness were now shaken, never to regain their full confidence. In the 1id-1880's disasters in the West combined with the 1884 panic to produce another series of strikes. This time the violence climaxed in the Chicago Haymarket Riot of 1886 .... The violence of the labor and agrarian protests in the 1870's and 1880's, combined with the warnings from some of America's foremost authors that a beneficent frontier could no longer be taken for granted, shocked many Americans into the realization that, as Goldwin Smith phrased it during the chaos of 1877, "the youth of the American Republic is over; maturity, with its burdens, its difficulties, and its anxieties, has come!' A restless society could not wait for a Darwinian fate to solve its problems. The New York Times, New York Graphic, and Minneapolis Tribune agreed with Harper's: “It is the business of the State, that is, of the people, to prevent disorder of the kind that we saw in the summer, by removing the discontent which is its caus.” American businessmen and policy makers in increasing numbers viewed expanding foreign markets as a principal means of removing the causes of this discontent…