Deficit spending is the act by which the federal government spends more money than it receives in revenue. In general the government engages in deficit spending during economic slowdowns as a way of pumping money into the economy to stimulate business activity and job growth. Before the 1930s, most presidential administrations were reluctant to engage in deficit spending. The reasons were twofold. First, deficit spending increases the national debt, or the overall amount of money the United States owes to its creditors such as banks, corporations, as well as foreign governments and even private individuals. Too large a debt can become a great burden by making it difficult for the government to borrow money. It also requires the government to divert funds away from various programs each year in order to pay back the money it owes. Secondly, most economic and political leaders believed that the best way to manage the economy was through a laissez-faire, or "hands off' approach. Conventional wisdom taught that there was no need for the government to try to spur economic growth – when left alone, a capitalist system naturally created a thriving economy and near full employment. The Great Depression; of course, changed all this. As the financial catastrophe of the 1930s worsened with each passing year, leading economists were at a loss to explain why the nation's economy could not right itself. It was during this time that British economist John Maynard Keynes stepped forward and claimed that the classical economists had it all wrong. In what became his landmark book, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (1936), Keynes argued that the normal workings of an economy did not necessarily bring full employment and stability and that government intervention, in the form of deficit spending and other measures, was the key to alleviating economic downturns. President Franklin Roosevelt practiced deficit spending in an effort to stimulate job growth. The benefits of deficit spending, however, did not become apparent-and the Great Depression did not end – until the onset of World War II, when the government greatly increased its expenditures and unemployment all but disappeared. In the years that followed, the nation's political leaders became strong proponents of deficit spending – and not just during times of financial or military crisis. Keynesian philosophy became official policy with the Employment Act of 1946, which gave the federal government greater authority in trying to maintain full employment and economic growth. The Keynesian technique reached a peak in the 1960s, when a large tax cut coupled with great amounts of government spending spurred a decadelong economic boom. The situation turned dramatically, however, in the 1970s when a new phenomenon known as "stagflation" – high inflation coupled with high unemployment-crippled the U.S. economy. This time it was the Keynesians who were stumped, as government intervention seemed to provide little help. When Washington, D.C. pumped money into the economy to create jobs, inflation increased; when it tightened the money supply to curb inflation, unemployment rose. It was during the 1970s that a number of leading economists began to voice opposition to Keynesian economics and called for less government influence in the economy. Fifty years later, the. debate seems far from settled. The merits of deficit spending as well as the larger issue of how much the federal government should intervene in the economy continue to prompt disagreement in economic and political circles – and probably will for years to come.