In the late 1800s, European powers followed a policy of imperialism. In imperialism, a strong country takes over the political, economic, or social life of a weaker nation. Great Britain, France, Germany, Belgium, and other European nations acquired weaker countries as colonies throughout Asia and Africa. European nations wanted colonies for economic reasons. Great Britain is an island nation with few natural resources. It acquired colonies to access raw materials for its factories. Raw materials like Egyptian cotton and West African palm oil and were processed into finished products – cotton cloth and oil-based candles and soap – around the world. Americans wanted to get into the act, too. Senator Albert J. Beveridge of Indiana summed up the economic argument for imperialism at the end of the 1800s. "Today," he said, "we are raising more [crops] than we can consume. Today, we are making more than we can use. Therefore, we must find new markets for our produce, new occupation for our capital, new work for our labor." All parts of society, he argued, would benefit if the United States had colonies. Unlike the European powers, the United States acquired few colonies. But it found a number of ways to gain influence in other countries without actually making them colonies. The Hawaiian Islands were a good example of how US influence grew. Since the early 1800s, Americans had migrated to Hawaii and become planters there. One of their major crops was sugar. Many of the American planters grew wealthy and gained influence over Hawaii's government. The Hawaiian planters had an economic advantage over sugar growers in other parts of the world. They could ship their sugar to the US without paying any tariffs, an advantage that disappeared in 1891 when Congress ended tariffs on sugar from all countries in the world. It also gave US sugar growers a government subsidy-payments to encourage them to grow sugar. The sugar growers in Hawaii were outraged. Because Hawaii was not part of the United States, they did not receive the subsidy. So, in the hope of having the United States take over Hawaii, they staged a revolt against the native Hawaiian ruler, Queen Liliuokalani. The planters established their own government and asked the United States to annex Hawaii. However, President Grover Cleveland refused to approve the annexation. In 1900, though, at the end of the Spanish-American War, Hawaii became a territory of the United States. In a variety of ways, the United States expanded its influence in other nations. Puerto Rico and the Philippines became territories of the United States. Although Cuba became independent after the SpanishAmerican War, the U. government had a strong influence on the Cuban government. The United States supported a revolution in Panama and then negotiated the right to build the Panama Canal, providing a shortcut between the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. In all these cases, American economic motives were central. The American government helped to protect American corporations in several Latin American countries. And the Panama Canal helped to spur American trade and shipping with the world.