The most striking and most telling piece of
footage in this celebration of Fidel Castro’s life is
also one of its quietist and most melancholy.
It’s 1997 and Cuba is just beginning to emerge
from the post-Soviet “special period”; a time of
extreme deprivation and uncertainty. A somber
group, including Castro, has gathered near an
airport runway at dusk. They’re there to meet about
a half-dozen small, dark-wood boxes as they’re
carried off a plane. Inside the boxes are the remains
of Che Guevara and his comrades, finally recovered
from the unmarked Bolivian grave in which they
had been dumped 30 years before.
Later, after the sun has set and the floodlights
have been flipped on, Aleidia Guevara, the daughter
of Che, is shown addressing the crowd. Guevara,
who like her late father is a physician, speaks with a
steady voice, the only sign of emotion are the teartracks drying on her fleshy but handsome face.
“Over 30 years ago, our relatives bid us
goodbye,” she says. “They left to promote Bolivar
and Martí’s ideal of a united Latin America -- we
never saw them again. Today their remains are
returned to us. They have not been defeated. They
come as heroes… forever young, brave, and
strong.”
With these last words, the camera cuts to the
deeply lined, fragile-looking face of an elderly Fidel
Castro. His down-turned eyes are moist and he’s
gumming his lips. It’s easy to imagine that the
Comandante en Jefe isn’t just mourning his
comrade, that instead he’s feeling regret, even
jealousy. There’s Che, the pure, perpetual
revolutionary, and here he is with a dying body and
a sprawling bureaucracy to oversee.
Made in 2001, Fidel: The Untold Story is
intended as a counterweight to the demonization of
Castro prevalent in the West and especially in the
US. Expertly assembled by the prolific Cubanbased filmmaker Estela Bravo, Fidel: The Untold
Story demonstrates that the image of Castro as a
tropical Stalin is not shared universally; that,
indeed, he is viewed as a hero by many, many
people of the Global South.
Combining archival footage and interviews with
figures ranging from Gabriel Garcia Marquez to
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., the film covers Castro's
entire life, from his privileged upbringing as the son
of a Spanish plantation owner, to the aged, fatigueclad figure on the airport runway. It’s not, however,
a typical biopic offering pop-psychology insights.
What it provides instead is a fascinating look at the
evolving image, the changing significance, that
Fidel and his revolution has provided to leftists and
anti-imperialists since he first took to the Sierra
Maesta with 20 comrades.
In the early '50s Castro, a little chubby and sans
beard, was a young lawyer and an aspiring
politician. His candidacy for the Cuban parliament,
as well as Cuba’s fledgling democracy, was cut
short when a general named Fulgencio Batista
launched a coup and overthrew the elected
government. After his attempts to challenge the new
dictatorship on legal grounds failed repeatedly,
Castro became convinced that revolution was the
only option. In 1953, the underground resistance
movement Castro had founded struck against
Batista, attacking two military barracks. It failed…
miserably. Nearly half of the rebels were killed and
Castro was thrown in prison.
Less than two years later, Batista, under
international and domestic political pressure,
released a number of political prisoners, Castro
among them. Fidel went into exile in Mexico,
where he met a young, militant Argentine named
Ernesto Guevara, better known as El Che. Fidel,
Che, and about 80 others planned to sail to Cuba
from Mexico, where they would launch an
unconventional guerrilla war against the Batista
govt.
They left Mexico in late November 1956 on the
ship Granma. They landed at Playa Las Coloradas,
in the rural eastern part of Cuba, much later than
expected, blowing their chance of launching a
coordinated attack with supporters in Cuba. Their
arrival went almost as badly as the earlier barracks
attack. Only about a quarter of the rebels were left
after their initial skirmishes with Batista’s army.
Castro and Che limped into the Sierra Maestra with
the less than two-dozen remaining fighters.
It didn’t take long for the rebels to regroup. They
gained recruits, shelter, & support from the
campesinos of the Sierra Maestra. Soon they were
winning victories against the larger, US-armed
Cuban army.
While the documentary relies on old reenactments
to visually present the earlier actions, the rebels’
romantic image and Castro’s media savvy brought
increased attention from the international media,
providing extraordinary footage of a historic,
almost mythic, revolution, as it happened. For
generations of people used to thinking of Fidel as a
Dr. Evil-type character, sitting in a secret lair
smoking a cigar, it may be shocking to watch this
documentary and see Fidel, the young, handsome
guerrilla, laughing and joking in a mountainside
clearing, lugging a rifle and a bulky backpack.
Two years after his nearly disastrous landing at
Playa Las Coloradas, Castro and his comrades
entered Havana as heroes. They were greeted by
ecstatic crowds and a battery of news cameras. The
documentary includes footage of Fidel’s first major
speech after assuming the position of Prime
Minister. While he’s speaking, a flight of doves is
released. And, in one of the greatest photo-ops in
history, one of them lands on Fidel’s left shoulder --
and stays there. There’s a collective gasp from the
crowd, then stunned silence, then, literally,
552
rapturous cheering. In the syncretic spirituality of
Cuba, a dove is the both the messenger of the
goddess Oshun and a symbol of Christ.
Going from the sublime to the surreal, we also see
a televised, long-distance interview between the
new Cuban leader and Edward R. Murrow for his
Person to Person show. Fidel, dressed in pajamas, is
sitting on a couch in what looks like the living room
set from a '50s sitcom. Murrow, sitting in a studio
in New York, asks Fidel softball questions like,
having overthrown a government not too long ago,
“You must be very tired.” Fidel responds demurely,
almost coquettishly, holding his head at a tilt and
looking up shyly. The scene seems so strange not
just because of its Leave it to Beaver set, but also
because it reflects a brief period in which Castro
and the US were not as antagonistic as they are
now.
The relationship between the US and its former
protectorate, however, quickly soured as the
Revolution’s land and economic reforms brought
swift retaliation from the States, whose corporations
had been used to treating the island like a personal
colony. These retaliations, in turn, led to
increasingly radical policy decisions by the
revolutionary government, culminating in the
unthinkable: the nationalization of all US-owned
businesses.
Bravo treats this moment with all the historic
import that it deserves. Fidel stands before a huge
and feverish crowd, listing, one by one, the familiar
names of US corporations being kicked out of this
newly independent nation. The biggest and lustiest
cheers come after Fidel hoarsely calls out: “United
Fruit Company!” As he speaks, the documentary
cuts to scenes of US flags and corporate logos --
Texaco, Chase Manhattan --being lowered and
Cuban flags raised in their place.
Eventually, Fidel becomes so overcome with
emotion that he can’t finish reading the names, and
his brother Raúl has to finish. Whatever one thinks
about the policy of nationalizing major industries,
watching this speech will send a charge through
your spine -- whether from fear or from pleasure. If
that moment seemed unthinkable at the time, it
seems simply impossible now. We can imagine
governments being overthrown… but Texaco!?!
Looking back at the footage, it’s almost easier to
believe that it was a fake, a hoax, rather than to
believe that the leader of a small, impoverished
nation could and would chase out all US corporate
interests.
This is, you could say, the story of the “Young
Castro”: smoking a cigar with Che in the Sierra
Maestra; a handsome and brave man standing up to
a dictator and to corporate giants. This is how he
was seen by the young radicals of the '60s, who put
up his picture in their dorms and communes. This is
the Castro who was a hero to irreverent antiauthoritarians like Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin.
Much of Bravo’s documentary is dedicated to a
different Castro, who could be called the “WorldHistorical Castro”. This is the Castro meeting with
Nehru, Nasser, and Malcolm X in a Harlem hotel
room; sending 36,000 Cuban troops to Angola to
fight in a 13-year campaign to chase out the
military of apartheid South Africa; shooting birds
with Khrushchev; haunting the dreams of 10 US
presidents.
In many ways this is the more important Castro.
Young Castro’s falling out of favor with radical
college students hasn’t meant much; Che picked up
his slack for the poster industry. However, many
people of the Global South adore the old, rumpled,
hoarse Castro. He is the one who has sent doctors to
their countries. He is the one who has come to their
country and spoken the language of egalitarianism
and dignity. He has made the people of the Global
South feel visible and powerful when they were
either ignored or treated as picturesque backdrops
by the West.
Bravo asked the activist and scholar Angela
Davis, who volunteered cutting sugarcane in late
'60s Cuba when it still had it’s post-revolutionary
glow, what she would write about if she were to
write a history of Castro. Davis doesn’t talk about
the battles with Batista or the post-revolution
literacy campaigns or the struggles of a government
trying to maintain a socialist economy 90 miles
from Miami. Instead, she says she would write
about the Castro who, “as the leader of one of the
smallest countries in the world, helped to shape the
destinies of millions of people across the globe.”
While Fidel: The Untold Story may mostly reflect
on World-Historical Castro, it is really about a third
Castro: the one who was present when this
documentary was made and the one who is with us
now. Let’s call him Dying Castro. This is the Castro
who watched as the people of the former “socialist
camp” mobbed a McDonalds during its opening
under the shadows of Soviet-era apartment blocks;
who watched as the victors of the anti-colonial,
Third World liberation struggles descended into
internal conflict, or corruption, or succumbed to
neo-liberalism. This is the man who fainted during
speeches and whose hand shook when gesturing
against the Empire. But it’s not his dying per se
that’s important—it’s fact that he’s still living. It’s
the fact that socialist Cuba is still living.
Writer Alice Walker paints the best portrait of
Dying Castro. “He is an old-growth redwood tree,”
she says in the documentary. “And all around him
has been clear-cut, and they’re lusting to make that
final cut.” Castro has gone from revolutionary hero
to “leader of the Third World” to being a
“redwood”, partly fossilized, partly living, and
imbued with the history of a half-century of
liberation struggles.
It’s his living, his still standing, that’s so
important. This is why opponents of Castro in
Miami and Washington can’t really take much
pleasure in the gastro-intestinal infection that’s
slowly bleeding him of life. Or in his tremors. Even
when we falls and breaks his hip in public, it's not
enough; he needs to die for them to be satisfied.
553
The fact that so much is invested in the personal,
bodily persistence of Castro should concern even
those sympathetic to his revolution. Because he
won’t survive forever. And, while people around
the world may remember him fondly for the
inspiration he provided, his solidarity with their
liberation struggles, or his courage, he will
ultimately be judged by what Cubans do after he’s
buried. Will his insistence on egalitarianism and
self-determination for small nations inform his
countrymen as they move to a more democratic
government? Or will his hand-picked successor, his
brother Raúl, do as many pundits in Washington
seem to hope: follow the Chinese model in using
the authoritarian apparatus of the State and Party to
enforce stability while they transition to a
particularly brutal form of capitalism?
I think the persistent note of nostalgia and regret
in this documentary - epitomized in the scene of
Fidel meeting Che’s remains at the airport –
evidences a lack of confidence in this remarkable
island’s future. While Castro was helping socialistinspired, anti-colonial revolutions around the world,
he never really finished his own. All power didn’t
go the people.
Director Estela Bravo doesn’t include many
criticisms in her film. For instance, there’s no
mention of Fidel’s support for the Soviets crushing
a flowering of independent, truly democratic
socialism in Czechoslovakia, nor is the
Revolution’s early persecution of gay Cubans
discussed. But she does leave a tiny hint of
dissatisfaction. In that surreal interview with
Edward R. Murrow, the newsman asks Castro when
he’s going to shave his unruly beard. Castro,
laughing, says he’ll cut it off when he’s fulfilled his
promise of good government. While Bravo
passionately defends Castro and the benefits of his
revolution, she must know that he’ll die with that
beard unshaved.