As the war in Vietnam intensified, President Lyndon Johnson found himself facing dilemmas that were not only political and military in nature, but economic as well. By 1966, Johnson had become deeply involved in two gigantically expensive undertakings--the Vietnam War and the Great Society. The president was determined to pay for both his military and domestic endeavors, a practice commonly referred to as giving the country "guns and butter." Johnson made his intent clear in his 1966 State of the Union address, when he declared that the United States was strong enough to fight communism abroad while fighting poverty at home. "Our Nation tonight is engaged in a brutal and bitter conflict in Vietnam," he stated. "But we will not permit those who fire upon us in Vietnam to win a victory over the desires and the intentions of all the American people. This nation is mighty enough, its society is healthy enough, its people are strong enough, to pursue our goals in the rest of the world while still building a Great Society here at home." There was a catch to all this, however. Johnson sought to fully fund both the war and his domestic programs through increased deficit spending--and not through an income tax increase. Johnson wanted to avoid a tax hike in large part because he had just helped to push through a significant tax cut in 1964, which had played a key role in stimulating the country's economic growth. Johnson was not about to upset the flourishing economy with a tax hike. His economic advisers, however, warned him that an increase in government spending eventually would pump too much money into the economy. This would lead to an increase in the demand for goods, which would drive up their prices, bringing inflation. This, of course, is exactly what happened. Between 1964 and 1969, the federal debt rose from about $316 billion to $367 billion. During those same years, the country's inflation rate jumped from 1.3% to 5.5%. By the end of 1967, a poll showed that 60% of Americans viewed the suddenly high cost of living as their number one concern. Only 5% voiced Vietnam as their number one worry. That year, President Johnson finally sought a tax increase to help curb the country's spiraling inflation. The belief is that a tax hike works to bring down inflation by prompting people to spend less money. Such a drop in consumer demand tends to lower the price of goods. The tax increase, however, appeared to be too little too late. A new set of economic woes visited the country in the 1970s--the most significant of which were continuous oil shortages--which boosted inflation even higher and pushed the country into a deep recession. And while Lyndon Johnson was out of office by then, many analysts view his fiscal policies as an underlying cause of the economic downturn. They also point to his administration as a prime example, of how difficult it is in the long run to fund both a war and a domestic agenda--or give the country guns and butter.