THE CUBAN REVOLUTION of 1959 marks a
dividing line in Latin American history. Before 1959,
a capitalist model of development appeared to be the
most viable means of escape for Latin America from
its age-old backwardness and dependency, with a
dynamic middle class leading a process of
industrialization and social reform. But by the end of
the 1950s these hopes for a capitalist solution for
Latin America's problems had dimmed. The
experience of such countries as Mexico, Brazil, and
Argentina, in which capitalism had grown rapidly,
suggested that as a rule the new industrial and
financial bourgeoisie was as fearful of social change,
as prone to encourage foreign economic interests and
suppress dissent by violent means, as had been the
traditional landed oligarchy. If Cuba's Marxist
revolution could succeed where capitalist approaches
had failed, sooner or later the revolution's success was
bound to have great continental repercussions,
particularly as the United States had long avowed that
it would not allow a successful socialist, antiimperialist revolution in its Caribbean backyard, a
part of the world that for a century had been a secure
U.S. preserve.
The Cuban Revolution did not begin as a socialist
revolution. In his famous "History Will Absolve Me"
speech, made at his trial after a failed attempt in 1953
to overthrow the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista,
Fidel Castro offered a program of social reform that
was compatible with capitalism and capitalist
democracy. But pressure from internal and external
enemies-especially the implacable hostility of the
United States-forced the revolution to move steadily
to the left. Denied markets in the United States,
Castro negotiated large trade agreements with the
Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist
community. By 1970 the Cuban Revolution had
survived a grave economic crisis largely caused by
the leadership's own mistakes, an invasion attempt by
Cuban exiles in the United States organized by the
CIA, and a confrontation between the United States
and the Soviet Union that brought a jittery world to
the verge of a nuclear conflict. By 1985 the revolution
was stabilized and institutionalized. A new
constitution (1976) sought to depersonalize
government and promote participatory democracy on
all levels of Cuban life.
The upward movement of the Cuban economy,
whose long-term growth rate was considerably higher
than that of the rest of Latin America, was interrupted
by periods of stagnation or decline that led to massive
emigrations of Cubans to the United States in 1980
and again in 1994. The collapse of the Soviet Union
and the socialist common market in 1989 deprived
Cuba of its major trading partners and dealt a
devastating blow to the Cuban economy. The crisis
was aggravated by an intensified effort by the United
States to strangle socialist Cuba through passage of
the 1992 Torricelli Act, which extends the U.S.
embargo against Cuba (in effect since 1960) to U.S.
subsidiaries in third countries and bars any ship that
docks in Cuba from entering any U.S. port for 180
days. The embargo has been condemned by overwhelming majorities of the U.N. General Assembly
and by the leaders of all other Latin American
countries. The collapse of the socialist economic
community and the tightened U.S. embargo have
reversed the trend of steadily improving social
conditions and produced a decline in living standards.
Despite the slippage in living standards, Cuba
continues to lead all other Latin American countries
in the quality of life it provides its children. Cuba's
infant mortality rate in 1993,9.4 per 1,000 live births,
is among the lowest in the world and almost equal
with that of the United States. Cuba's life expectancy
rate, 76 years, compares to an average life expectancy
of 58 years in the underdeveloped world. Cuba hopes
to overcome its economic crisis by diversifying its
trade links, vastly expanding tourism, discovering
large oil re
serves off its shoreline, and developing new
biotechnology and medical exports.
Was it possible to achieve socialism in any Latin
American country without some degree of armed
struggle? The Chilean election of 1970, which
brought to the presidency the socialist Salvador
Allende, supported by a coalition of the Socialist,
Communist, and Radical parties, put that question to a
searching test. Allende assumed the presidency in
November 1970 with a program for the
nationalization of foreign-owned natural resources,
key industries, and banks as well as a sweeping land
reform. One year later the Allende government had
strengthened its position by victory in municipal
elections and had taken large strides toward achieving
changes of such magnitude that they might prove
irreversible. The United States, which had made
frantic efforts to prevent the election and inauguration
of Allende (including pressure on the Chilean military
to intervene through a coup) now launched a
campaign to destabilize the Allende regime and
strangle the Chilean economy by denying credits and
using other methods of economic warfare. This
destabilization effort was synchronized with a parallel
campaign mounted by Chile's capitalists and landed
oligarchs to create political and economic chaos. The
reactionary opposition profited by the discontent of
large sections of the urban middle class, which
resented the hardships of growing inflation and goods
shortages and the decline in its standard of living visa-vis that of the working class. Meanwhile
preparations for a rightwing military coup were under
way. In September 1973 a military revolt led by
General Augusto Pinochet broke out. Salvador
Allende, refusing to surrender to the rebels,
committed suicide after heroically defending the
presidential palace with a few aides to the last.
Scattered and poorly armed leftist resistance was
speedily crushed.
The reign of terror that followed had no precedent
in Chilean history. Thousands of Chileans were
murdered, often after brutal torture; thousands of
557
others fled into exile. The new ruling junta liquidated
the radical changes and social reforms of the Allende
regime and was guided in its economic policies by the
free market theories of the Chicago school of Milton
Friedman, with catastrophic effects on the Chilean
economy and living standards. By 1985 the junta and
its president, General Pinochet, had lost most of their
original middle-class support. Pinochet's growing
isolation reflected changes within Chile and the
continent-wide movement in the 1980s away from
authoritarian military rule. Even the United States,
which had colluded with the 1973 military coup in
Chile, now pressured the dictator to make a transition
to democracy. Maneuvering to remain in power,
Pinochet called for a plebiscite in which Chileans
would vote on a proposal to grant him eight more
years as president. In October 1988, Chilean voters,
by a decisive margin, denied Pinochet a new term as
president. In December 1989 the first democratic
election since 1973 gave the presidency to the
Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin, favored by the
United States. Aylwin, the candidate of a coalition of
left and center parties, also had a clear majority in
congress.
But the outlook for a genuine democratization of
Chilean society remained clouded. To begin with,
Aylwin (who had initially supported the fascist coup
but later had a change of heart) operated within the
limits imposed by the 1980 constitution crafted by
Pinochet, which left him solidly entrenched in the
Senate and the judiciary and gave the military an
extraordinary degree of autonomy. Rather than
challenge the legal and institutional heritage of the
dictatorship, Aylwin adopted what has been called a
policy of "gentle accommodation" with the military.
This policy meant, among other things, that there was
very little progress in bringing to justice the military
who had tortured and killed thousands of Chileans.
Secondly, Aylwin implemented even more
energetically the export-led model of economic
growth, based on foreign loans and investments, that
the "Chicago Boys" had put in place, with a stress on
such export products as seafood, fruit, and lumber at
the expense of national industry and agriculture
producing staples for the domestic market.
Economists called attention to the vulnerability of the
exported model to changes in international prices and
demand; environmentalists warned that the model
was not sustainable over time because of soil erosion
and excessive use of pesticides that endangered
health. Again, Aylwin made virtually no change in
the pattern of labor relations inherited from Pinochet,
which subordinated the rights of labor to those of the
employer. In democratic Chile, for example, farm
workers are prohibited from striking during the
harvest season, the time when a strike would be most
effective. As a result, despite some improvement in
living standards since 1989, Chilean society continues
to be marked by great inequity and injustice. The
vulnerable character of the current economic model
and its failure to address the country's great economic
and social problems contributes to keeping alive
Allende's dream of a democratic socialism in the
framework of a pluralistic political system.
In December 1993 Chileans elected the Christian
Democrat Eduardo Frei, son of a reformist president
of the same name, as president. He took office
promising to continue the current economic course
but vowed to end extreme poverty by the year 2000,
reform the labor laws, and regain civilian control of
the military.
The revolution, led by the Sandinist Front of
National Liberation (FSLN)1, that toppled the
Somoza dynasty of Nicaragua in July 1979 set the
stage for an experiment in social and economic
change unique in Latin American history. Most if not
all of the Sandinist leadership accepted some form of
socialism as their ultimate goal. But a striking feature
of their socioeconomic program was its moderate and
gradualist approach. Even after the expropriation of
the vast landholdings and other properties of the
Somoza family and its collaborators, most of the
economy remained in private hands. Large
commercial farmers as well as peasant cooperatives
and small independent farmers received aid from the
government in the form of credits, guaranteed prices,
and the like. At the same time the Sandinist state
insisted that capitalists, whether large farmers or
industrialists, display social responsibility by
reinvesting part of their profits in their enterprises and
complying with the reform legislation defining the
rights of workers and tenants. Some capitalists
accepted the new rules of the game with good grace;
others sabotaged or abandoned their enterprises and
left the country.
In 1985 the Sandinist revolution celebrated its sixth
year in power. Those six years had seen some
remarkable social gains: large progress toward the
liquidation of illiteracy, the provision of free medical
and dental care to the population accompanied by a
sharp drop in infant mortality, and at least a modest
overall rise in the standard of living of the masses.
That progress would have been much greater had it
not been for the fixed hostility of the United States
under President Ronald Reagan toward the new
Nicaragua. This hostility was reflected in a trade
embargo that did great damage to the Nicaraguan
economy, and above all in an undeclared "covert" war
whose forms included the provision of financial and
material aid to counterrevolutionary forces led by
former commanders of Somoza's National Guard and
the mining of Nicaraguan harbors by the CIA. The
"covert" war clearly flouted U.S. laws, treaty
obligations, and international law, a fact effectively
conceded by the Reagan administration when it
refused to accept the jurisdiction of the World Court
in a complaint made by Nicaragua before that body
against U.S. interventionist actions.
Following his election to the presidency in 1988,
George Bush continued Reagan's policy of employing
a mercenary puppet army to wear down the
Nicaraguan government and economy, create war
weariness, and eventually produce an internal
collapse. The strategy scored a major success when a
majority of Nicaraguan voters, voting, in effect, with
558
a U.S. gun pointed at their heads, chose the
conservative presidential candidate Violeta Chamorro
over the Sandinista Daniel Ortega in the elections of
February 25, 1990. But the FSLN remained the
country's strongest political party. Supported by the
powerful labor and peasant unions, it resisted with
partial success efforts by the Chamorro government to
dismantle the agrarian reform but could not prevent
the new regime from implementing neoliberal
economic policies that favored the old elites at the
expense of the masses. As hunger, unemployment,
and discontent grew, the coalition of parties that had
supported Chamorro split into a moderate
conservative wing loyal to her and an extreme
conservative, even Somocista-like, wing that opposed
her opening to the Sandinistas. Within the Sandinista
camp a division also emerged between a social
democratic faction that favored cooperation with
Chamorro and a group that proposed firm opposition
to her neoliberal program and return to the traditional
Sandinista program of structural economic and social
reform. With new elections scheduled for 1996, little
time remained for the Sandinistas to reunite their
leadership, rebuild their grassroots organization, and
develop a coherent alternative program to the
bankrupt neoliberal program of the Chamorro regime.
Revolutionary movements that asserted socialist
ideals had also arisen in two other Central American
countries dominated by corrupt and oppressive
military establishments: El Salvador and Guatemala.
In El Salvador the Farabundo Marti Front for
National Liberation (FMLN), representing a broad
coalition of social and political forces, waged a
twelve-year struggle against a U.S.-supported
government and army. Despite massive infusions of
U.S. military and financial aid, by 1990 the FMLN
controlled much of the country and showed an ability
to launch powerful offensives at will. The changed
balance of forces forced President Alfredo Cristiani
(1989-1994) and his right-wing regime to accept
proposals for U.N.-sponsored peace talks. Prolonged,
difficult negotiations finally resulted in the January
1993 signing of peace accords that provided for the
dissolution of the government's security forces; the
creation of a new national police open to both
members of the former national police and FMLN
guerrillas; a reduction of the armed forces, to be
cleansed of military personnel guilty of human rights
abuses; and the holding of new elections in 1994 in
which the left, for the first time in fifty years, could
openly run. Those elections, marked by numerous
irregularities due to fraud and incompetence, and by
an abstention rate of about 5% that probably reflected
fear and distrust of the government, gave victory to
the ruling right-wing party and its presidential
candidate, Armando Calderon Sol. But the FMLN
secured 2% of the vote and established a substantial
presence in the legislative assembly. Under new
peace-time conditions, the FMLN began a political
and social struggle that in time, many of its leaders
believed, would lead to the achievement of a
democratic socialist society.
In Guatemala, where a CIA-organized coup had
overthrown a democratic reformist government in
1954, a socialist-oriented guerrilla movement fought
for decades against barbarous military regimes that
employed scorched-earth tactics and massacres of
Indian peasants to deprive the guerrillas of their
support bases and drive them into remote jungles and
mountains. Under international pressure, in 1985 the
military permitted the election of a civilian president,
Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo, but retained effective control
of the country's life under Cerezo and his successors
in the presidency. By the late 1980s the guerrilla
military activities, led by the Guatemalan National
Revolutionary Unity (URNG), were again increasing
in scope and frequency. Under U.S. pressure, in 1993
the reluctant military accepted a proposal for U.N.-
sponsored talks with the URNG, and by March 1994
a human rights accord that provided for international
monitoring of army bases and guerrilla camps had
been signed. But military hardliners, fearing the loss
of their impunity, responded with a deadly wave of
killings and disappearances, which the current
president, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, appeared unable to
stem. As 1994 drew to a close, the return of peace to
Guatemala still appeared far off.
A series of developments, including the collapse of
the Soviet Union and other Stalinist-type
governments in Eastern Europe, has led some
observers to conclude that socialism had no future on
this continent. This reaction may reflect a misreading
of the situation. To begin with, the catastrophic
economic and social results of the replacement of
socialism by a "savage capitalism" in Eastern Europe
suggests to many that capitalism may not be the wave
of the future after all. Secondly, the adoption of
neoliberal economic policies by such countries as
Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela, Peru, and
Bolivia has not led to balanced development and
rising living standards but has instead contributed to
increased misery and social crisis. There is no
evidence, in short, that stronger doses of capitalism
can solve the problem created by Latin American
dependent capitalism. Finally, contrary to a common
assumption, left-wing or socialist-oriented
movements are not dying on the vine in Latin
America. Evidence to the contrary includes the
survival, against all odds, of the Cuban experiment in
socialism; the continued vitality of such movements
in Central America; the rise of the powerful Workers'
party in Brazil; the recent capture by left-wing parties
of the mayoralty of Uruguay's
capital, Montevideo, which has more than half the
country's population, and the mayoralty of
Venezuela's capital, Caracas; and, most recently, the
revolt in the Mexican state of Chiapas led by the selfstyled Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN)
in January 1994.