Economists characterize it as a combination of two main trends over the past decade or so. The first is the revolution in information technology. The invention of the microprocessor--which made possible the development of the computer, fax machine, and cell phone--has dramatically changed the way Americans live and work. While the manufacturing of goods once drove the nation's economy, it is now the delivery of information and services--with the help of these modern communication tools--that fuels the country's economic engine. By the mid-1990s, nearly 80% of all jobs in the United States resided in the service sector. Information technology accounted for a quarter to a third of the nation's economic growth. The second aspect of the new economy is the globalization of business. From e-mails to fax machines, wireless technology has made doing business with foreign companies as easy as if they were located down the block. In addition, a number of recent international agreements have lowered trade barriers among many countries of the world. The result of all this for the United States and other nations is an increase in international commerce. While imports and exports made up l7 percent of the US economy in the late 1970s, for example, they now account for about 2%. Few would disagree that this "new" economy has been a good one for America, as it ushered in the longest economic expansion in US History from 1991 to 2001. During this decade-long boom, the overall economy expanded, the stock market soared, and unemployment reached its lowest levels in decades. One reason for the low rate of joblessness was the creation of so many information-related jobs. Between 1980 and 1997--as the country shifted from a manufacturing to a service economy-43 million jobs were lost hut 71 million new ones created. Also contributing to the economic growth of the 1990s was a steady rise in worker productivity prompted in large part by the extensive use of technology. As workers in nearly every field used computers to help them perform their jobs more quickly and easily, worker productivity rose a healthy % each year between 1995 and 2000. Globalization played a role in the economic boom as well. The increase in global trade, first and foremost, opened new markets for US goods and services. In addition, as trade barriers fell, cheaper goods became more available around the world--including in the United States. . To be sure, the new economy has not been beneficial for everyone. Most of today's information-related jobs require a higher degree of skill than the jobs of the past. As a result, many unskilled laborers have had trouble finding work or earning a decent living. In addition, the increase in globalization has prompted a number of US companies to move overseas--mainly for cheaper labor - leaving scores of American workers unemployed. And for all its strength, the new economy was not immune to a recession. According to the country's leading economists, the US economy fell into a recession in March of2001. A recession is an economic downturn marked by at least six months of declining gross domestic product. The economy took a further hit in September of 200 1 when the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center crippled the airline industry and many industries related to it. Like the others before it, however, this recession will be temporary. The new economy, on the other hand, is most likely here to stay.