Dictatorships have been known historically to censor
people’s freedom of expression. From the communist
regimes in the Soviet Union to Saddam Hussein in
Iraq, and today in modern day Cuba, people are locked
up for questioning or disagreeing with the action,
views, and or policies of their government. Regardless,
people still try to make their voices heard. Nobody
Listened is a documentary film that attempts to reveal
the truth about one of the world’s most notorious
dictators, Fidel Castro. After watching the film and
researching the issues that relate to it, we found that
this particular film is part of an even bigger issue of
censorship that not only involves the censorship in
Cuba, but also that of Cuban exiles in the United States
of America. We will examine here the various ways
that the documentary film Nobody Listened has been
censored both in Cuba and in the United States.
Cuba is known to the world for having excellent
literacy rates and an outstanding system of health care;
however, most civilians consider this a myth created
by the revolutionaries, since for decades Cubans have
suffered under Castro’s dictatorship. Although some
Cubans favor his government, a considerable amount
has fled, mainly to the United States, to escape his
regime and Cuba’s poor conditions of life. Castro
censures people’s freedom of expression by arbitrarily
banning any material (book, film, or article) he feels
threatens his government principles, such as the
declaration of Human Rights or a Cuban exile book,
and labels it as “counter-revolutionary.” Since Castro
first formed his government, 47 years ago, thousands
of political and regular prisoners have been accused of
committing crimes. What are considered crimes, as
mentioned in the article Against All Hope: A Memoir
in Castro’s Gulag, are things like being part of
organizations defending Human Rights, sedition,
possessing counter-revolutionary or non-authorized
material, or if the person has been arrested before and
is considered politically active, Castro will find any
pretext, such as refusing government officials to
fumigate the person’s house with substances she/he is
allergic to, to arrest him/her (Valladares 1-2). They
were, and are, taken to jails where they endure
unthinkable abuses, ranging from horrendous tortures,
forced labor and beatings, to “accidental deaths” and
executions.
The documentary made by Nestor Almendros and
Jorge Ulla, Nobody Listened, touches on these issues,
questioning the general state of Human Rights in
Cuba. The film is inspired by the book Against all
Hope, where the author, Armando Valladares describes
the experiences he and other prisoners went through.
Nobody Listened is an expository documentary
showing a series of people’s testimonies ranging from
Castro’s former comrade, to priests and civilians that
had been, or had a relative, in at least one of the
prisons shown. Their stories are accompanied by
footage or pictures supporting their testimonies, and on
given occasions, the narrator explains further the
images shown.
When one watches the movie, one realizes
immediately why the film is censored in Cuba. This
documentary is completely against the revolution, or
better said, against Castro’s government since it
reveals the stories of people that have gone through
terrible tortures and somehow survived. It questions
Cuba’s system of Human Rights and shows the
discrepancy between what Castro and his “comrades”
say is happening in Cuba versus what is really going
on according to the everyday experiences of many
Cubans. Castro has a remarkable ability, like any other
tyrant, to ignore what the people are going through in
his own country. He demonstrates his unwillingness to
make things better when he said that “for those who
hope for change ‘Let them sit down and keep hoping,
because in Cuba there is no need to change a thing’”
(Valladares 3).
The documentary also tackles the non-supportive
response of Cuba’s government towards its exiles, as
in the case with the directors themselves (Ulla and
Almendros). This can be seen at the beginning of the
movie when Ulla is trying to ask important figures of
the government for their contribution, or their thoughts
on the situation of Human Rights in Cuba, and they
respond, if at all, with ambivalence, evasion or outright
refusal to talk to him. Exiles are considered traitors to
the country, and therefore, do not deserve any help.
Also, it should be kept in mind that obviously exposing
the real situation in Cuba is inconvenient for Castro.
To this end, the reaction of the people in his
government is to be expected.
It is understandable that due to such a dictatorship
people who have seen this documentary in Cuba are
few and far between, but what about in the United
States, a country who prides itself on being the Land of
the Free? Well, it seems that in the U.S there is a tacit
sense of censorship, an implicit way of making
decisions about what is broadcast since they cannot air
everything is made in order to make everyone happy,
and this is precisely why this documentary and others
like it have been rejected. The censorship of the film
Nobody Listened is not something that limits itself to
films with explicit descriptions of the terrible things
that certain people had to go through in Cuban jails,
but is actually part of a bigger problem that Cuban
American intellectuals face every day.
Although we could not contact Jorge Ulla, and
Almendros passed away in 1992, we could get a hold
of a friend of Almendros, the filmmaker (Covering
Cuba series from one to four) Agustín Blázquez, who
provided us with substantial information about the
censorship of this type of documentaries, particularly
in the United States. For years, intellectual Cuban
exiles residing in the U.S have been discriminated
555
against by the people who control the media and the
ones in charge of promoting and distributing artists,
filmmakers, and writers’ works. As mentioned in
Blázquez’s article, Branded by Paradise and Maligned
by Exile, there is a herd of “pro-Castro sympathizers in
the U.S. media and in the film industry” (3) who, like
the dictator they support, react in this way against
people who do not share their political beliefs. An
example of this is when Nobody Listened was rejected
in 1988 by the New York Film Festival, the same
festival that rejected Bitter Sugar (Leon Ichazo) and
This is Cuba (Chris Hume); which are also films that
contain as well controversial information about
Castro’s regime. However, this trend did not go
unnoticed because of the group of Cuban American
filmmakers who protested against this decision, and
among these protesters was Ulla. According to
Blázquez’s article “Enough is Enough,” the director of
the festival, Richard Pena, said that the films are
chosen irregardless of their content. This is the same
man who said that Improper Conduct, another film by
Nestor Almendros, “attacks the stability of the Cuban
revolution” (Blázquez 1). No correlation is shown
between what the principle of the Festival seems to be
and what actually happens at the end. It seems as if
films of this sort are destined to receive little or no
airtime.
In our conversation with Agustín, he sounded
aggravated by the fact that although people like him
had spent a great deal of time, money, and effort to
produce and direct films with such an important
message, and in a country where freedom of
expression is so valued, are yet still censored. He felt
helpless in relating that everything is about politics and
about who controls public broadcasting. According to
him, as repeated many times in both his articles and
our conversation, a large part of the media and art
world in the U.S., which includes filmmakers and
festival organizers, are considered political Leftists.
This means that in a free country like the United
States, they have the right to express their views. At
the same time, it is contradictory that precisely this
situation is what prevents movies like Nobody
Listened from being seen; as was the case with the
festivals rejecting it, and the PBS TV stations, which
was probably the most blatant form of censorship that
has been imposed on the film.
For years, PBS refused to show it, but in 1990 when
they finally agreed to broadcast it - better late than
never, they cut out about an hour of the two-hour film.
This meant that many of the powerful testimonies of
torture and suffering where left out. Furthermore,
immediately after it ended, PBS aired a pro-Castro
documentary entitled The Uncompromising
Revolution by Saul Landau. This, according to
Blázquez, was something that Ulla and Almendros
considered an absolute offence to their work. He
shared their opinion and compared it to the unlikely
scenario of a movie about the Holocaust being aired,
followed directly by a pro-Hitler movie. This is
something that would never happen, he said. He also
added that by doing so, and by cutting down the film,
the message they were intending to send was diluted or
had no effect, since the audience was put in “double
standard” situation.
After having examined the issue about censorship
being applied to the documentary film Nobody
Listened, in Cuba it seems inevitable that a film like
this one would be censored, judging from the regime
under which it is governed. As mentioned earlier, one
of the first rights taken away from people living in a
dictatorship is freedom of expression. Therefore, it is
impossible to show a film like this one under the
political conditions in Cuba. On the other hand, the
case of censorship in the United States is a different
issue. It seems strange that a country not involved with
decisions concerning what is broadcast in Cuba, since
it is a different country, in its own country when
dealing with this issue, trying to sort out between proCastro and against-Castro material, they apply a tacit
censorship. Because it is such a delicate issue, they
should be objective and neutral, but instead they take a
biased stance. It would seem more adequate and fair to
perhaps still show both side views, as everyone has the
right to speak their opinions, but maintaining respect,
above all, towards both groups, and leaving it up to the
audience to interpret what they see in a considerable
space of time.
Going through this investigation has provided deeper
insight into the controversial issue of censorship. One
sometimes takes for granted freedom of speech in
countries like the United States, since we are used to
the idea that we are expressing ourselves with minimal
or no restraints. However, what seems common sense
to us is not necessarily the case for others. In the case
of Cuban exiles in the U.S. their films are apparently
too controversial to be shown. For us, the fact that the
material is controversial and revealing is precisely why
it should be shown. We should be prepared to deal
with the complexity and conflict in society by
acquiring as much information and debating the issues.
In this way, overt censorship and heavy biases by those
with power amounts to. Our right is to know.