Ronald Reagan campaigned for president in 1980 vowing to make major changes in how the federal government acted. He had plans to change how much the government spent and how much it collected in taxes; an economic program called "Reaganomics." Every year from 1969 to 1980, the government spent more money than it collected. The extra money had to be borrowed. The federal debt--all the money that the federal government owed-grew larger every year. By the 1980 election, the government owed $709.3 billion. Reagan said this hurt the economy because investors were loaning money to the government rather than to businesses. This slowed the growth of the economy. Reagan wanted to make deep cuts in education, welfare, and similar programs. The Democrats controlled the House of Representatives. They made cuts in domestic programs, but not as many as Reagan wanted. At the same time, Reagan rapidly increased defense spending. As a result, overall government spending continued to grow. Reagan also wanted to cut taxes, believing that people would spend or invest the money they saved, which would help fuel business growth, which would lower unemployment. In the end, the government would collect more taxes as a result of this economic growth. Taxes were cut; between 1981 and 1983, they were lowered by 25%. And the economy did grow. However, that growth was not as fast as Reagan had hoped. Government revenues did not increase as much as expected. This, combined with the higher levels of federal spending, produced even bigger budget deficits. Reagan was President from 1981 to 1989. During this period, the government had to borrow between $121 billion and almost $180 billion each year. The result can be seen in the graph below. The federal debt soared between 1981 and 1989. By 1990, the government owed nearly $2.5 trillion. At the same time, though, the economy grew during most of Reagan's presidency. Partly because of lower taxes, consumers had more money to spend--and they spent it. Unemployment fell as companies hired workers. And the inflation of the 1970s was no longer a problem. Yet the federal budget deficit continued to grow because the federal government did not collect enough taxes. The deficit continued to be a major issue into the 1990s. It was a major issue in the 1992 election, helping third-party candidate H. Ross Perot to win almost 20% of the vote. In 1997, though, President Bill Clinton and Congress agreed on budget cuts. In 1998, for the first time since the 1960s, the government had a surplus.