A half-century of Spanish misrule and broken promises of reform culminated in the Cuban revolution of 1895. The revolt began when Jose Marti landed on the eastern coast. The revolt swept westward, soon enveloping the entire island. The patriots proclaimed a republic, and Tomas Estrada Palma became provisional president. Rebel generals, such as Maximo Gomez, Antonio Maceo, and Calix to Garcia employed guerilla warfare tactics against the two hundred thousand troops sent from Spain to quell the revolt. They cut off a Spanish detachment here and there, then vanished into the jungle. The insurgents were never maneuvered into a pitched battle as they were militarily inferior to the better armed and trained Spanish soldiers in the field. In time, the war developed into a system of terrorism; the insurgents destroyed crops, burned sugar refineries, tore up railroad tracks, and exacted forced loans from merchants and bankers. Under Governor-general Martinez Campos, the Spaniards conducted tile war in accordance with European tactics. When these methods failed, Campos was recalled. His successor' was General Valeriano Weyler, whose brutal policy was to starve the people into submission. Weyler built barriers of wire entanglements across the island to prevent the rebels from crossing from one place to another. Hopefully, the rebels would be driven into restricted areas where they would be captured or killed. Militarily the strategy was sound, if the plan could be sustained. In Spanish-held areas, suspected rebel sympathizers and their families were herded into concentration camps. Throughout the island, lack of food and poor sanitation caused disease and starvation, and the mortality rate among these unfortunate people was appalling. Though the United States government maintained a policy of neutrality, public opinion solidly supported the insurgents. Despite neutrality laws, Cubans in the United States and American sympathizers frequently managed to send war material and arms to the insurgents. A considerable number of American soldiers of fortune made their way to Cuba. By early 1896, American public opinion against the war became so intense that both Houses of Congress passed a joint resolution favoring the recognition of Cuba's hostile rights ... Secretary of State Richard Olney offered to mediate, but Spain turned down the offer. President Cleveland, who refused to be bound by congressional resolutions, asserted that the time was not propitious for the recognition of hostilities, much less for independence. The president did manage to secure the release of some captured Americans and accepted a congressional appropriation for food for the starving insurgents. In 1897, Secretary of State John Sherman requested abolition of Weyler's concentration camps. On August 4, Madrid sidestepped the issue by replying that the situation was not as serious as it was pictured. When Gen. Stewart L. Woodford succeeded Hannis Taylor, the American minister in Madrid, on September 13, 1897, he once more expressed the wishes of the United States for ending the war and announced that American patience was growing thin. Within a few days the ministry of Spain resigned and a new one was formed under the leadership of Senor Sagasta. General Weyler was soon replaced and Cuba was granted self-government. On December 6, 1897, President McKinley expressed his desire to give the new policy a fair test. Self-government pleased neither the Cuban loyalists nor the insurgents. The loyalists rioted in Havana on January 13, '1898. Frightened by loyalist denunciation of Americans, Consul-General Fitzhugh Lee. advised the president that it might become necessary to take drastic steps to protect our interests in Cuba. As a result, the battleship Maine was ordered to Havana. In retaliation, the Spanish cruiser Vizcaya was ordered to visit New York Harbor. Ostensibly, the Maine was anchored in Havana Harbor on a socalled goodwill mission. There was nothing concerned with goodwill about it. The battleship was there to protect the American residents and American owners of Cuban property. In February, the New York Journal, a Hearst newspaper, published a stolen letter written by Senor de Lome, Spanish minister in Washington, to a friend in Cuba. Senor de Lome labeled McKinley a "cheap politician who tries to leave a door open to himself while on good terms with the Jingoes of his party." Highly embarrassed, de Lome admitted the letter's authenticity and resigned. Jingoist papers had a field day with the affair and were still exploiting it when news of the Maine explosion hit the wires. Two hundred and sixty of her officers and crew lost their lives in the February 15 disaster. Captain Sigsbee of the ill-fated battleship asked the public to refrain from judgment pending investigation. Most Americans assumed that the loss was due to Spanish treachery, that the explosion was caused by a submarine mine. The Spanish Court of Inquiry reported that the explosion might have been caused by combustion in the ship's magazines. Historically the explosion will remain a mystery. However, it was no mystery at the time to the board of American naval officers who were appointed to investigate the disaster. They reported that the explosion was caused by a submarine mine, which, in turn, set off an explosion in the ship's bow. Throughout the United States, the word~ "Remember the Maine" became a vengeful sound. President McKinley still tried to prevent a war, largely because the country was unprepared for a conflict. A presidential spokesman, Minister Woodford, reported on March 29: "The president 492 instructs me to say that' we do not want Cuba. He also instructs me to say, with equal clearness, that we do wish immediate peace in Cuba. He suggests an armistice, lasting until October I, negotiations in the meantime being had looking to peace between Spam and the insurgents, through the friendly offices of the President of the United States." Spain made many counterproposals, and the road to peace was cluttered with obstacles. Many men of influence advocated war; some were outspoken while others were more subtle in their words. Senator Thurston of Nebraska said, "War with Spain would increase the output of every American factory, it would increase the business and earnings of every railroad, it would stimulate every branch of industry and domestic commerce." War, was to be promoted as a commercial enterprise. Warmongers hid behind no democratic rhetoric. They didn't say they wanted to make the world safe for democracy. They were frank in saying we would take Spain's possessions because we were strong enough to do so. Thurston was not alone in favoring war; Henry Cabot Lodge, Theodore Roosevelt, and others were as war-mad. An attempt on the part of Germany, France and Austria-Hungary to intervene on Spain's behalf was blocked by the friendly attitude of Great Britain and by President McKinley's own diplomatic skill. In April, the president sent Congress a special message favoring war as a means of ending the conflict. Eight days later, on April 19, Congress declared "that the people of Cuba are, and of right ought to be, free and independent," demanding that Spain withdraw from' the island and directing the president to use our forces to carry the resolutions into effect. It was formally stated that the sole purpose of American intervention was to liberate the Cuban people from Spanish rule. Before the outbreak of hostilities on March 8, 1898, Congress had appropriated $50 million as an emergency fund for national defense. Three weeks later, Congress added $39,000,000 more for the navy. The War Department had been slow to rise to the crisis. Our military posture was alarming; our regular army consisted of 28,183 officers and men. A larger force of poorly-trained state militia could not be assigned to federal service without the consent of War Department Secretary Alger. Weapons were scarce - a few good Krag-Jorgensen rifles and carbines, a larger number of antiquated 45 caliber Springfields, which used black powder, and a limited supply of smokeless-powder cartridges. There was more coast artillery than field guns. Congress authorized the president to call for 200,000 volunteers, and about 182,000 were actually enlisted. Many of these troops were militiamen. The Spanish army had about 492,000 men under arms. Of these, 10,000 were in Puerto Rico, 51,000 in the Philippines and 278,000 in Cuba. Many of these soldiers were poorly trained and equipped; others had been forced to enlist and their hearts were not in the cause. Spain's best soldiers were no match for the American regular army. Though the United States army was small, it was composed of welltrained and disciplined men. Most of the officers were West Pointers. Many had seen service in the Civil War or in the taming of the West. When the war was declared in April, Admiral Dewey, then a commodore, was in command of the Asiatic fleet. The Americans had been concentrated at Hong Kong in readiness to strike at Spanish forces in the Philippines. However, Dewey was forced to leave Hong Kong by a British proclamation of neutrality. Dewey's fleet, consisting of a cruiser Olympia, three smaller cruisers; two gunboats, a revenue vessel, a collier and a supply ship rendezvoused at Mira Bay on the Chinese coast. On April 25 he received orders to destroy the Spanish fleet which was anchored in Manila Bay. The fleet waited for the arrival of Williams, the American consul at Manila, before departing. Then, in the late afternoon of April 26, the ships steamed' across the China Sea and entered Manila Bay on May 1. The Spanish fleet at Manila, commanded by Rear Admiral Montojo, was no match for Dewey's force, and the Spanish shore defenses proved useless. In the early morning, the Americans bottled up Montojo's fleet near the Cavite Base and annihilated it during a five-hour siege. American casualties were light: eight men were wounded and no ship was lost. The action in the Philippines abruptly came to a standstill. The Americans were without troops to garrison the city of Manila. Dewey decided there were neither enough sailors or Marines to serve as an effective police force. He waited until the arrival of ground troops from the United States before entering Manila. For months Dewey's ships were anchored in the bay. On June 30, a small contingent of American troops arrived. It was not until August 13 that enough land forces, with the aid of Filipino insurgents, were able to rout the Spanish and occupy the city. In the Philippine campaign and elsewhere during the almost bloodless war, the navy showed great achievement in contrast to the inefficiency of army leadership. In two major naval engagements in which the Spanish navy was destroyed, American losses were less than twenty men. The new United States navy, small in comparison to that of Great Britain, contained some powerful vessels manned by skillful officers and men. The main strength' was in four battleships: the Oregon, Indiana, Massachusetts and Iowa. The Texas was rated as a second-class battleship. Numerous cruisers of various classes, gunboats, torpedo boats, and many antiquated monitors were used only for coastal defense. The navy had been prepared for war. John D. Long, head of the Navy Departm6flt, was a very capable man. Theodore Roosevelt, his assistant, was even more capable and possessed a keen knowledge of naval requirements. He understood the importance of preparedness for war and lightning first strikes. The weakness of the Spanish navy is attributed to inadequate and unskilled seamen. Spain had only one first-class battleship, the Pelayo, but she was smaller than the American battleship in the same 493 class and in need of repair. The Spanish naval strength lay in numerous armored cruisers and destroyers, of which the United States had none. Most Americans feared that Spanish sea power was much more formidable than it really was. At the outset of the war, the North Atlantic fleet, under the command of Rear Adm. William T. Sampson, was dispatched to Key West. Immediately after the declaration of war, Sampson's fleet moved into Guban waters to blockade the northern coast. Commodore Winfield S. Schley's force was lying in readiness at Hampton Roads while Commodore J. A. Howell's northern patrol was guarding the eastern seaboard of the United States from Maine to Delaware. Capt. Charles E. Clark brought the battleship Oregon from the Pacific Coast around Cape Horn to the Florida coast, a voyage of some fourteen thousand miles. The battleship arrived on May 26 in fine condition and ready for duty. ..' . Rear Admiral Sampson was anxious to get into action and proposed attacking the defenses around Havana. The Navy Department, fearing further international complications, especially with Germany, ordered him to conserve his strength by restraining from unnecessary activity. Intelligence reported that the Spanish Atlantic fleet of four cruisers and two destroyers had been sighted sailing from the Cape Verde Islands under the command of Rear Admiral Cervera. A waiting game followed. Sampson steamed toward Puerto Rico, thinking that Admiral Cervera would refuel at San Juan. Not finding him there, he turned toward Havana on May 12. On the previous day, Cervera had engine trouble near Martinique and had proceeded to Curacao, where he took on a supply of coal. When the news that the Spaniards were near Martinique reached Washington, Commodore Schley was ordered to sail to Cienfuegos. On the south coast of Cuba, Cienfuegos was thought to be the likely place for Cervera to patrol. However, Cervera had taken shelter in Santiago Harbor, and it was days before the Americans found him. Cervera was fairly safe in the bottle-shaped harbor; the narrow entrance to the harbor was well-fortified by guns and mines. He maintained communication with Havana even though the railroad line was cut. Neither troops nor supplies could be sent to his aid. By the end of May, Schley's force was able to blockade the harbor. Soon afterwards, Sampson's fleet arrived and Sampson assumed command of the whole operation, which involved the greater part of the American navy. Long range bombardments soon reduced some of the resistance. On June 3, an attempt was made to block the harbor by sinking an old collier, the Merrimac, across the narrow channel. The effort failed, but the attempt won world-wide applause. Previously, the United States government had decided not to use large landing forces in Cuba until after the hot summer months. The generals feared deadly tropical fevers which took high tolls during the summer. But Cervera's plight offered an opportunity to strike a fateful blow. Seventeen thousand ground troops embarked from Tampa, Florida, in the middle of June, bound for Santiago under the command of Maj. Gen. William R. Shafter. Another force consisting of soldiers of fortune, ranchmen, big game hunters, cowboys, Indians, and other adventurers was commanded by Col. Leonard Wood, an army surgeon who had been active during the Indian wars. Architect of this operation was Lt. Col. Theodore Roosevelt, who had resigned his office ill the Navy Department to organize an expeditionary force. Roosevelt was offered the top command, but he insisted that Colonel Wood should retain it because of his experience. The regiment was nicknamed "Roosevelt's Rough Riders," or "Teddy's Toughs.” The army landed at Daiquiri, east of Santiago, on June 22, under cover of barrages from naval guns. Despite inadequate landing equipment, about six thousand men reached Cuban soil by nightfall. The following day, General Lawton's men captured the village of Siboney and the rest of the army landed there. General Young and the Rough Riders scattered a Spanish detachment at La Guasima and pushed the Spaniards into Santiago. The next week was spent. M regrouping the army at Sevilla, bringing up supplies, and making contact with the remnants of General Garcia's insurgents. By this time the United States soldiers were beginning to feel the ravages of fever, poor food and inadequate shelter from heat and ram. General Shafter became ill and was unable to conduct the campaign. Despite Shafter's illness, an attack was planned for San Juan Hill at the end of June. Major General Wheeler's division, which included the Rough Riders, and Kent's division of infantry were to advance on the hill. Major General Lawton was to command 6,500 men to storm the fortifications at EI Caney and to protect Wheeler on the right. On the morning of July 1, Lawton's men attacked the Spanish at El Caney; by late afternoon El Caney was theirs. The fighting at San Juan hadn't gone well; heavy losses were sustained while troops were crossing the San Juan River. Lack of organization and authority caused doubt and hesitation; for a time the troops were trapped under intensive firing. Finally, Brigadier General Hawkins, a Civil War veteran, and Colonel Roosevelt, who was now in command of his regiment, led courageous charges against the Spanish defenses. The fighting remained intense and the battle moved toward Santiago. Some of the rear soldiers wanted to withdraw from the action, but the men and officers at the front protested and refused to retreat. The victorious Americans dug in on the captured hills. On July 3, General Shafter, in serious condition, cabled Washington that he could not take Santiago by a sudden attack and that he had considered withdrawing about five miles to hold a better position. American losses for the battle were 1,100 men. On the day that General Shafter sent his cable to Washington, a turning point dispelled all thought of 494 retreat. The Spaniards believed that the capture of Santiago was imminent. General Blanco in Havana ordered Admiral Cervera to leave Santiago Harbor. On July 3, Cervera steamed out of the harbor and attempted to escape westward. Admiral Sampson, on the cruiser New York, was not with the fleet but had left strict orders to pursue Cervera if he should break out of Santiago. His orders were immediately executed and the American fleet quickly overtook Cervera. In the ensuing battle, Cervera's entire fleet was sunk. The Cristobal Colon was the last Spanish ship to go down. No American ships were lost and there were two casualties; one sailor killed and one seriously wounded. Admiral Sampson, on the cruiser New York, did not take part in the action. Commodore Schley was the senior commanding officer during the engagement. A bitter controversy later arose over the question of who was in command. Santiago was vulnerable from both land and sea but held out until July 14, when General Toral agreed to surrender, thus ending Spanish rule of the island. McKinley appointed Leonard Wood as provisional governor in Cuba. Although many Americans wanted United States annexation of Cuba, the. vast majority stood by our pledge to help establish a free and democratic Cuban government. Meanwhile, festering internal problems were developing into open sores in the Philippines. As in Cuba, many of the native people had long been dissatisfied under Spanish rule and had revolted frequently. The last of these revolts occurred in 1896. In this Catholic country, the Dominican Order held vast areas of land in the islands and consequently wielded considerable political and economic power. To protest church excesses and civil misrule, a revolt was organized by the Patriot's League under the leadership of Emilio Aguinaldo. The insurgents suffered such privation that Aguinaldo and other top leaders accepted an armistice called the Treaty of Briac-No-Bato on December 15, 1897. Primo de Rivera, the Spanish governor-general, promised to correct certain abuses and to pay the leaders $800,000 if they would stop the revolt and go into exile. The Spaniards never honored their agreement. Before Commodore Dewey left Hong. Kong, he was informed by the American consul at Singapore that Aguinaldo was anxious to continue his struggle against the Spaniards. Dewey therefore arranged a meeting and an American boat brought Aguinaldo and thirteen comrades to Manila Bay. The Americans gave them needed support and soon the Filipinos started a new revolt that ended Spanish domination over much of the Philippine Islands. Aguinaldo's insurgent forces even laid siege to Manila. Another incident complicating the Philippine situation was the appearance of five German warships in Manila Bay. They had been dispatched to protect Germany's small commercial interests there. All other foreign warships observed neutrality. The Germans ignored the American blockade and interfered with the movements of the insurgents. They openly expressed their sympathy with Spain. Dewey's patience became exhausted and he sent word to the German commander, Vice-Admiral von· Diederich, that if he wanted trouble he could have it right now. The import of the message was increased by the presence of the British naval forces in the harbor. Commanded by Capt. Edward Chichester, the British force would have joined the Americans if armed hostilities had broken out between Dewey and Diederich. Great Britain and the United States had maintained a close friendship during this period; much of it was due to the personal influence of John Hay, the United States Ambassador at London. Reinforcements arrived late in June. A force of twenty-five hundred troops commanded by Brig. Gen. Thomas M. Anderson landed at Cavite outside of Manila. Brig. Gen. Francis V. Greene and Maj. Gen. Wesley E. Merritt both arrived with additional men before the end of July, making a total of eleven thousand troops. The plight of the Spaniards in Manila became critical. On August 13, the American forces quelled all resistance after a short fight in which only a few Americans were killed or wounded. The day before Manila had surrendered, Secretary of State William R. Day signed a document providing for an armistice, for relinquishing all Spanish claims to Cuba, and for cession of Puerto Rico and Guam to the United States. All Spanish troops were to evacuate Cuba and Puerto Rico. The disposition of the Philippines was to be decided at the peace conference. The Philippine question was a touchy one; public opinion was divided as to what should; be done with the large archipelago. Some wanted to retain it as a fueling base; others wanted to withdraw from the Philippines altogether. In the end, President McKinley decided to annex all the territory. Opponents of annexation contended that the remoteness of the islands would prevent eventual statehood status for the Philippines. However, expansionist views prevailed and on February 6, 1899, the treaty was signed. Approval by the Queen of Spain was delayed by internal politics until March 19, 1899.