In 1995 the Cuban Revolution was thirty-six years old, and Cubans could look back with pride on their
accomplishments. Until their progress was recently halted by setbacks chiefly due to external events, it
appeared that the great scourges of Latin America - hunger, unemployment, inadequate housing-had been
liquidated or put in the way of disappearance. Cubans took special pride, however, in their educational
achievement. A Great Campaign to wipe out illiteracy in the countryside, carried out with the aid of thousands
of young volunteers from the cities, was launched in 1961 and soon achieved its goal. The Cuban educational
system, specialists agree, was without equal in Latin America in its scope, modernity, and general quality.
Jonathan Kozol, a North American educator who carefully observed the system and spent much time in
discussion with students and teachers, reflects on what has been achieved and what yet remains to be done.
Jonathan KozoI, Children of the Revolution: A Yankee Teacher in the Cuban Schools, New York: Delacorte Press, 1978
Whether we judge by technological progress, by
classroom preparation in genetics, electronics, or
statistics, or by the reverence which is shown for
art, literature, and music in the Cuban schools, there
seems no question but that quality has now almost
caught up with quantity in Cuba's education
scheme.
Effectiveness alone, however, does not measure
up to the demands and expectations of a nation
dedicated to the dreams of Che Guevara and Jose
Marti. The patterns of reward for academic labor, as
I have debated them at length with students at
Martyrs of Kent, have to be considered also in a full
appraisal of the ethical and economic consequences
of the intellectual preparation offered to the Cuban
population.
If the rewards for certain avenues of preparation
far outstrip those of all the others, then we are
forced to wonder whether this consideration will
not be a primary factor in the choices pupils make
as they progress from year to year and whether this
will not subvert the model of the self-effacing man
or woman Che Guevara held up as an ethical ideal.
It is apparent, for example, that the sheer material
rewards for a career in medicine are very, very high
in contrast to the earnings of a semi-skilled
technician, and higher still in contrast to the
earnings of an unskilled worker at a factory or on a
farm. It is one thing to announce, as it was said to
me so many times, that "individual achievement in
this nation is respected always in an emulative
sense," but it is another thing if certain groups of
highly skilled professionals can win the privilege to
eat in pleasant restaurants, spend weekends in
delightful new hotels, and also find the funds to
purchase air-conditioners, refrigerators, or TV –
while others must accept a life of relatively
unexciting and austere routine.
Compared to the United States, the range of
salaries is very small indeed. It is also small in
contrast to the gross extremes of misery and wealth
that were the curse of Cuba for all its modern
history prior to 1959. Furthermore, there is a large
degree of equal privilege assured by virtue of the
abolition or (as in Christina's case) drastic reduction
of most housing rentals, as well as by provision of
free health care for all people, free day-care, and
free schooling costs – including the cost of meals
and clothes, as well as books and travel and tuition
for the pupils of the schools en campo and the other
five-day boarding schools such as Jose Marti.
Admission, moreover, as we have seen, is strictly
regulated to prevent the influence of parental power
or prestige.
Even so, the persistent dangers of a potentially
remorseless meritocracy remain. I see no means by
which to balance out the efforts and the earnings,
the delights and the extremes of physical effort in
the swelter of intense humidity and heat, so long as
salary differentials for the intellectual versus the
manual labor of a Cuban citizen remain so great.
Sandra said to me, in her heavy-throated voice: "I
think you're right, the difference is too great. As
history advances we'll reduce that disproportion.
Someday, everyone who works as hard as possible
should get the same."
It remains to be seen to what degree the socialist
conscience of a child such as Sandra will find the
means to bring the practical incentives into line
with ethical ideals. It may well be that government
leaders will, in time, no longer feel the obligation to
conciliate or to reward, beyond a modest limit,
those who already have their own reward in the
ever-changing intellectual challenges and triumphs
that cannot be separated from a certain number of
sophisticated and complex careers. To add the
economic bonus, too, and to do so four times over
(as at present), does not seem in keeping with the
words and goals of Cuba's revolutionary leaders.
There seems to me no question but that pupils
such as Mario and Sandra are totally devoted to a
process of increasingly egalitarian reward, but there
is also Marisela, who made clear to everyone within
that meeting room that she did not agree. Marisela
was eloquent also-a lovely, generous, and
persuasive human being. So it remains to be
discovered in the years to come whether the
children of the revolution are thinking more like
Marisela or like Sandra, whatever their reverence
for the words of Cuba's heroines and heroes and the
views which they espouse.
Another ethical index of a social order and of its
educational system is the visible degree of equal
access it affords – for example, by the abolition of
discrimination in regard to race and sex. In
reference to the first it is astonishing to me to
recognize, despite all prior doubts, that Cuba has, in
fact as well as reputation, come to be a nation
which is almost entirely color blind. My own best
evidence proved to be my routine evening efforts at
quick written recollections of the people I had met
during the day. Often I would jot down ten or
563
twenty characteristics of a child or a teacher or a
principal whom I had met and chatted with that
day-before it would occur to me to scribble down
that he or she was white, black, or [mixed]. Several
times, I found that I could not recall.
To a large degree it has to be said that the
emphasis of Abel Prieto on this point seems in
retrospect to be disarmingly precise. Any social
order that can help a well-trained U.S. citizen to fail
to recognize a detail of this kind clearly has
managed to make a multitude of other factors both
more memorable and more important than skincolor.
In regard to the rights of women it occurs to me
that Sandra (and her older fellow citizens in the
classes of the FOC [Federation of Cuban Workers])
said almost all there is to say. It is obvious that
many years of self-deprecation on the part of
women, as well as several centuries of absolute
male domination, cannot be so rapidly erased as
many Cuban men and women would like to be able
to report. It's still unfair, as Sandra made quite
clear; but, as she said, "I can tell you one thing: It
won't be that way for long!"
Cuban women, without question, now have equal
rights and equal status in the eyes of the law; they
also shoulder equal burdens, such as late-hour duty
(neighborhood patrol) within the vigilancia of the
CDR [Committees for Defense of the Revolution].
More than once, both in Havana and in Santiago, a
woman on guard duty for the CDR would ask me,
in a gentle but insistent manner, to tell her why I
happened to be looking with so much persistent
curiosity into a dark store window in the early hours
of the dawn.
For now, however, it is honest to say that women
still are not afforded equal power and prestige with
Cuban men, even in the face of the new, highly
publicized and, in my own view, earnestly enacted
Family Code and even despite the pleadings of
Fidel.
One final criterion of the moral values of a new
and revolutionary social order seems to me to be the
way in which the government does, or does not, pay
respect to older people. In Cuba old people are not
easily relegated to the slag heap of retirement
homes and welfare checks. I think of the vitality
and optimism of Juan de la Cruz. I think, too, of the
words of Rosario Garcia, herself moving now
beyond the realm of middle age, who said to me:
"There was a time when we were thinking mainly
of the young. . .. We sense today the very great
untapped potential of the old, even the very, very
old. . .. "
Behind these words there is a dream, a principle,
a powerful idea – one which has been voiced here
also in the U.S. by Paul Goodman, who spoke often
of the terrible wastage of the talents of old people.
He argued in vain for the employment and the
residence of older people in buildings where our
infant children might be left in day care programs
while their mothers and their fathers go to work. In
many neighborhoods of Cuba this idea is now a
viable reality: not an official government "plan" or
"program" or the like but just a natural idea that
grows in practice and in popularity with every
passing year.
At stake here is not just the need "to keep old
people happy" in an active and regenerative state of
mind. It is the whole idea of work itself as a
redeeming and rewarding need for every human
being. Small kids, in third-grade classes I have had
the chance to visit, work meticulously, though at a
modest pace, in a forty-five-minute period during
which they take small amounts of tea from large
imported barrels and then stitch that tea, by a wellregulated process, into little tea bags for the use of
Cuba's population. The children do not work unduly
hard, nor do they injure their backs or strain their
arms. They simply take a small, and seemingly
enjoyable, role in helping to provide one of the
basic needs of their society.
From young to old, the principle is the same.
Those who can contribute to the common good do
what they can. It is impressive to perceive how
much the little kids can do. Older people work with
these small children to assist them in their task. I
think again, while in this class, of the slogan
popular back in 1961, during the literacy work:
"Those who know, teach. Those who don't, learn."
The heritage of the Great Campaign lives on. 