The Benefits of Trade Trade arises from having more than you need of something that someone else wants. Suppose you have more food than you could possibly eat. However, you need a winter coat. Suppose you know someone else who has an extra coat but no food. You two can trade. You can exchange the extra food for the extra coat. You each benefit by giving up something you had too much of for something you didn't have at all. The same principle applies to trade between nations. They exchange something they can produce in a surplus for something they lack. A surplus is more than a person--or a nation-needs of an item. During the Middle Ages, European nations started producing a surplus of goods they could trade. England and Holland, with large numbers of sheep, produced wool. Weavers in Flanders - a region of present-day Belgium - made cloth from that wool. France produced wine, wheat, and wool. Russia supplied furs and lumber products. Northern Italy made manufactured goods. Eastern Europe mined ores and grew wheat. Each area traded goods it had in abundance for products it lacked. Many groups in Europe benefited from this revival of trade, as the chart below shows. Trade between Europe and Asia also began to increase. Europeans wanted spices and silk, but they could not produce these goods. What they could do was trade for them with nations in Asia, where the goods were produced. The spices and silk the Europeans brought into their countries were imports. The goods they sent to Asia were their exports. The Muslims who lived in the Middle East controlled this trade. European merchants and rulers hoped to win control of the trade for themselves. But because the land route was in the hands of the Muslims, Europeans needed another approach. So they explored for a sea route. For example, when Christopher Columbus sailed west from Europe, he was searching for a sea route to Asia. This search for a sea route for trade led to intense competition between nations. Most European nations participated in a worldwide struggle for economic power.