Fearing that Che’s burial place would become a
shrine to the fallen guerrilla leader, the Bolivian army
officers secretly disposed of his remains. Che’s body
– excluding his hands, which were amputated for
positive identification – and those of his comrades
were buried in a mass grave near a Vallegrande air
strip in central Bolivia. But rather than destroy the
myth of Che, the circumstances surrounding his death
only intensified it.
In Asia, Latin America and Africa, Marxist
guerrilla movements embraced his image as a symbol
of revolutionary struggle. Che Guevara In Western
Europe and North America, protesting college
students invoked his image in defiance to the Vietnam
War, racism and anything considered the
establishment. Che’s image, bearded and wearing a
single red star studded beret, became an international
symbol of revolt and revolutionary idealism.
Thirty years later, Che Guevara still fascinates and
confounds. In Cuba, 1997 is observed as “The Year of
the 30th Anniversary of the Death in Combat of the
Heroic Guerrilla and His Comrades.” And on October
12, 1997, after his remains were unearthed in Bolivia,
Che’s body was returned to Cuba, where he is now
buried in the town of Santa Clara.
Despite the official celebrations honoring its fallen
hero, many experts believe that the Cuban
government is more interested in promoting Che’s
image than his actual ideas, many of which conflict
with Cuba’s current state policies. But the Cuban
government is not alone in the plundering of Che’s
legacy: everyone from Hollywood to athletic
equipment manufacturers are cashing in on the fallen
revolutionary’s image, if not his principles.
In addition to being the topic of several upcoming
feature films and the subject of several new
biographies released this year, Che Guevara’s image
itself has become a formidable marketing tool. A few
years ago, Swatch, the Swiss manufacturer of
watches, released a Revolution model of their watch
adorned with Che’s image on its face.
Similarly, Fisher, an Austrian Ski and Tennis
manufacturer, unveiled a Revolution model of its skis
also adorned with Che’s likeness on its product. In the
world of music, the very political rock band, Rage
Against the Machine, have placed Che’s image on
everything from album covers to T-shirts. And in
Bolivia, tourist agencies offer package tours through
the mountains and countryside where Che and his
comrades fell thirty years earlier.
From posters to even a short lived beer in London
(it was taken off the market following Cuban
government objections), Che Guevara, long a potent
political symbol, has become a pop icon of mythic
proportions. In a recent interview in the Miami
Herald, Jon Lee Anderson, author of the groundbreaking new biography Che Guevara: A
Revolutionary Life, noted, “Che is the last
unplundered icon of the ’60’s in popular culture, and
now can be looted for commercial use in our
entertainment culture.”
Answering your forum questions is Jon Lee
Anderson, author of “Che Guevara: A Revolutionary
Life” (Grove Press) and former reporter for the Lima
Times in Peru. Mr. Anderson, working over the last
five years, gained unprecedented access to both Che’s
personal archive through his widow and to the
formerly sealed Cuban government archives. In
addition, Mr. Anderson interviewed scores of Che’s
closest comrades and friends, KGB officials who
worked with Che and the CIA men and Bolivian army
officers who hunted him down.
Jorge E. Ravelo, M.D. of Virginia Gardens, FL, asks:
Thirty-odd years after the death of Che Guevara
many Cubans like myself are perplexed by the
attention given to a man we knew well enough to
despise. Why should this man who preached the
virtues of cold-blooded HATE as a weapon of
revolution, who was the executioner of many
innocents all the way from the Sierra Maestra to the
Cabana prison, and who ultimately betrayed the
revolution he rode to fame and misfortune be the
subject of so much attention? What has Che to offer
today besides a commercial opportunity? Why all this
attention? Why now?
Mr. Jon Lee Anderson, author of “Che Guevara:
A Revolutionary Life,” responds:
In his characterization of Che Guevara, Mr. Ravelo
makes a number of sweeping and emotional
assertions which are historically unsound.
For instance, he says that Che was “the executioner
of innocents all the way from the Sierra Maestra to
the Cabana prison.” To this I must point out that,
while Che did indeed execute people, I have yet to
find a single credible source pointing to a case where
Che executed ‘an innocent’. Those persons executed
by Guevara or on his orders were condemned for the
usual crimes punishable by death at times of war or in
its aftermath: desertion, treason or crimes such as
rape, torture or murder. I should add that my research
spanned five years, and included anti-Castro Cubans
among the Cuban-American exile community in
Miami and elsewhere.
Next, Mr. Ravelo asserts that Guevara “ultimately
betrayed the [Cuban] revolution.” This is a novel
concept indeed. Indeed, it is the first time I have
heard such a claim. Mr. Ravelo is obviously
confused: Che Guevara was a Marxist, and, even
before the victory in 1959, he was determined to see
that Cuba’s “revolution” become a Marxist one.
He never concealed his beliefs, and never swerved
from this course. I have never heard anyone – even
his most bitter foes – accuse Guevara of betraying his
beliefs in Marxist revolution. Indeed, there are many
amongst the U.S. Cuban exile community who credit
Guevara for having always spoken honestly about the
aims of Castro’s revolution – while accusing Castro
544
himself of having ‘betrayed’ the many anticommunist Cubans who once supported him.
Jason Kanarish of Seattle, WA, asks:
During this hero-less time and relative lull in the
currents of history, (if such a thing exists), is it
possible that Che represents something more than the
era in which he died? Was it Che’s revolutionary
idealism and sincere dedication to a cause that make
him so appealing now, or are these characteristics that
have fallaciously arisen from his ‘myth’?
Mr. Jon Lee Anderson responds:
I think Che’s contemporary appeal is due in great
measure to his “revolutionary idealism and sincere
dedication to a cause,” at a time in which such
examples of idealism and faith are seen as quaint,
quixotic or misplaced. In a sense, Che is the ultimate
emblematic figure of what might be called the Decade
of Youth — the Sixties — the last period in our
country in which young people around the world rose
up in revolt against the established order, believing
that they could actually change things, Who better
than Che exemplifies that phenomenon?
At the same time, I think that Che does transcend
his era, in that he serves as a visible reminder that
history is full of surprises, and that many of its most
dramatic episodes have been spawned by individuals
who, like him, looked around them, did not like what
they saw, and thereafter dedicated their lives in efforts
to change things.
In this sense, too, Che perhaps represents the
perennial ‘idealism of youth’ and it is undoubtedly
the reason why he remains an international figure of
mythological dimensions, especially amongst the
young. Like Icarus — who tried to fly to the sun and
died, inevitably, in his effort – Che stands out as a
latter-day mythological hero, admired for his daring
and his faith — and some would say his innocence –
in trying to achieve the impossible.
In a sense, Mr. Ravelo’s overheated and erroneous
perceptions show why I believed it was necessary to
write my book: To try and construct an accurate
portrait of a fascinating, controversial and littleunderstood man, dispelling many of the legends,
conjectures and myths — both positive and negative
— that had cloaked his figure during the Cold War.
I think even Mr. Ravelo would agree that history’s
protagonists –however distasteful they may be to
one’s particular worldview – are worthy subjects of
biography. We are enriched by our knowledge of the
past, and they include those men and women who
have affected history – for better or worse.
Finally, regarding all the attention Guevara has
been given recently: It just happens that a number of
biographers, including myself, have published their
findings coinciding with the thirtieth anniversary of
Che’s death. The fact that his secretly-buried remains
were finally discovered in Bolivia this summer also
contributed to renewed public interest in Che
Guevara’s life and times.
David Miller of Highland Park, IL, asks:
Considering the manner in which he died, how will
history treat Che relative to other guerrilla leaders,
like Washington, Chairman Mao and Ho Chi Minh?
Mr. Jon Lee Anderson responds:
Unlike the “revolutionary” leaders mentioned by
Mr. Miller, Che was not a politician. He was first and
foremost a visionary who was propelled by his radical
concept of political and social change which
transcended national boundaries. Unlike these other
leaders, he gave up all the trappings of privilege and
power [in Cuba] in order to return to the revolutionary
battlefield and ultimately, to die. He didn’t, strictly
speaking, have to, and if he had been more impelled
by the desire to exercise power, or the innate sense of
pragmatism that seems to come with great politicians,
he wouldn’t have.
I think history will always tend to romanticize Che,
especially because of the circumstances of his death.
There was ‘glory’ in the ingloriousness of his end,
both in the tenacious way he persisted in his Bolivian
guerrilla campaign, despite its increasingly obvious
futility, and finally, in the way he met death face-on
after his capture. History loves Quixotes.
Denice Marie of Silver Spring, MD, asks:
I am a bit concerned with all of the mass iconization
of Che. He was a Marxist Revolutionary, with many
members of the former KGB as his comrades. Do you
see this fueling even more anti-American sentiments
abroad, as well as anti-government sentiments among
America’s “lost generation Xers” who do not have
hope in the “machine” as it is?
Mr. Jon Lee Anderson responds:
I don’t think the “return of Che” will fuel any more
anti-American sentiments than already exist around
the world today. It is useful to comprehend why such
sentiments exist. In general, they are caused by the
widespread international perception that the United
States is a militaristic country which traditionally
looks after its own interests at the expense of the
national dignity of others. In Latin America, which
Americans have always regarded as their “backyard,”
there is a sufficiently long historical record of
American intervention to have created long-standing
resentments in the region.
It is easy to demonize the Soviet KGB – an
especially distasteful agency – but it seems valid to
put the “Red Bogeyman” and Che’s affiliation with
them into historical context. It occurred during the
Cold War, when two opposing political philosophies
competed for international dominance, and in their
own role in that competition, the American CIA
thought nothing of violently overthrowing foreign
regimes, supporting Latin American death squads and
allying itself with the Mafia to assassinate Fidel
Castro – all in the name of ‘anti-communism.’
Indeed, it is important to remember that Che
Guevara’s own political radicalization (and “antiYankee” convictions) occurred in Guatemala in 1954
during the American CIA’s overthrow of a
democratically-elected left-wing government.
With regards the possibility that American GenXers might become “anti-government” because of
545
Che’s example: I think contemporary history is
already proving that this is not the case. The most
dangerous anti-government sentiments in America
today come from the extreme right – eg: the militia
movement, white supremacists and assorted true-blue
American “Patriots.”
If anything, I see Che’s appeal to Gen-Xers as a
form of symbolic identification with a rebel figure,
someone critical of the status quo. Wearing Che’s
face on your T-shirt is a way of saying: “I am a rebel
in spirit; I don’t accept what the Establishment stands
for.” For most, this essentially aesthetic, nonthreatening form of revolt will fade as they graduate
from college, get their first jobs, and begin families –
along with their nose rings and bleached hair. But for
the meantime, it is imperative that society allows
them the room to broadcast their inconformity with
the way things are, just as it is necessary that society
tolerates their hopes of making a future difference.
Bertrand M. Bell of New York NY, asks:
In your inquiry what role did the CIA play in the
death of Che? Would the assassination have
succeeded without the CIA?
Mr. Jon Lee Anderson responds:
The American role in the defeat of Che Guevara in
Bolivia was probably decisive. The U.S. Special
Forces trained a Bolivian army battalion in
counterinsurgency techniques with the specific aim of
pursuing Guevara’s guerrilla band, and it was the this
same Bolivian battalion which actually captured Che
Guevara.
A Cuban-American CIA agent, Felix Rodriguez,
was present at Che’s execution. Although Rodriguez
claims to have had CIA orders to try and ‘keep Che
alive’ – but could do nothing to stop Che’s execution
when it was ordered by Bolivia’s military president,
General Rene Barrientos – there is no evidence to
support his claims. Nor, it has to be said, is there any
evidence showing that the CIA actually ordered Che’s
assassination. But in covert intelligence operations,
deniability is everything. If there was a CIA order to
kill Che, it was probably never committed to paper.
What we are left with, then, is the historical
evidence that the CIA was involved in the effort to
hunt Che down in Bolivia, and that a CIA agent was
present at the moment of his execution. Having said
that, if Bolivian soldiers managed to capture Che
without American assistance, they probably would
have killed him anyway, because they did not tend to
take prisoners.
Should Che Guevara be considered good or bad?
from Quara.com goo.gl/nqc9kA
Che writes in his diaries about coldly executing
people and we still have people today believing he was
a superhero. The right answer is probably that he was
initially good, but ended as a cold-blooded killer.
It is interesting how people justify Che's actions as
"good" by appealing to:
1."Che Guevara was a product of his times": Sure,
so was Hitler, Stalin and every other mass
murderer in history. Let's just blame it on what
was happening at the time. The fact that most
people were not murdering other people to "save
the world" can be safely ignored.
2."Che had good intentions and truly had a heart for
the poor": Sure, so that makes it ok for him to
personally execute hundreds of people
(Wikipedia page, footnote 120) and for the
regime to kill many more in the name of a cause.
Let's just blame it on the fact that he was
corrupted over time, but his intentions were truly
great.
3."It depends on your ideology": Sure, let's just
forget about facts. Why should we read his
diaries or any other history source? That was
probably written by a right-wing guy to bash on
Che's true ideology. Just a few hundred coldblooded murders don't make him bad!
4."It is very easy to dismiss Che as a terrorist": Yes
let's just say that he was a very nebulous
character that no one can truly understand. This
way we can make it easier for people to like
him, specially because he was so driven by his
goals of "social justice". Everything can be done
in the name of social justice, no? Let's just say
that there are no trustful sources out there that
can truly show his character.
5."I have yet to find a single credible source
pointing to a case where Che executed an
innocent": Oh that is such a relief! I thought that
he could have executed an innocent. That is so
good to know that he only executed guilty
people! And I am sure that the guilty ones went
to a fair trial where Che was the judge, jury and
the executioner, so that was fair.
Great point.
Che Guevara and other leaders with a similar
ideology usually get a free pass on murder, torture,
corruption, loss of individual rights, and loss of
freedom because they were doing it "for a cause".
People believe what they want to believe.
Interestingly enough, some of the people that
consider Che a "good" person are the ones who
condemn what is happening today in Cuba, Venezuela,
and North Korea.