A national economy goes through periods of good & bad performance; the "business cycle." In good times, the economy grows. Businesses produce more goods and services. Consumers buy more, which convinces businesses to produce even more. Wages go Up, as do profits. In bad times, businesses cut back on production. Instead of hiring workers, they lay workers off. With less money, consumers spend less. Eventually, the economy stops growing. That is, the total value of goods and services produced in the country does not increase from one month to the next. If this happens six months in a row, economists say that the economy is in a recession. If the lack of growth lasts longer and goes deeper, it is called a depression. Two factors affect the business cycle: •Purchases: Increased spending leads to growth. Less spending means no growth. Consumer spending has this effect. So does spending by the government. •Interest rates: When lowering interest rates, loans cost less than before, businesses and consumers are more likely to borrow money. Higher interest rates slow growth down. As interest rates go up, businesses and consumers borrow less money. During Reconstruction, the United States went through the worst depression that it had experienced up to that time. The depression started with the Panic of 1873. What caused this panic? During and after the Civil War, there was a great boom in railroad building. Most of that building was funded by loans. Serious problems lurked beneath the surface, though. First, railroads and other businesses borrowed far more money than was healthy for the size of the American economy at the time. Second, there was no government regulation of industry. Business owners pursued profits in any way possible. These factors, along with financial problems in Europe, combined to cause chaos in late 1873. A major New York financial company was having problems that year. It bought millions of dollars of bonds from a railroad company. (A company issues bonds to borrow money.) When the financial company could not resell the bonds, it collapsed. Loans came due, and businesses were unable to pay them. The depression that resulted lasted for six years. Thousands of businesses went bankrupt, and many banks closed. Millions of Americans lost their jobs. Farm prices fell. With little income, workers and farmers cut back on spending. This slowed business, production even more.