As Latin America approached its independence centennial, two trends, one of external origin and the other internal, emerged with greater clarity. The first was the emergence of the United States as a major world power, preoccupied with its security in the Western Hemisphere and possessing a strong drive to invest in and trade with Latin America. The other was the emergence of better-defined middle sectors within Latin America. The growing middle sectors were looking for their own sources of inspiration, their own example. The industrializing and progressing United States attracted their attention. They visited New York before Paris; they learned English rather than French. Above all else, they admired the new technology associated with the United States. They saw in industrialization their key to advancement, and no country industrialized more rapidly and more thoroughly than the United States. They may have feared the expansion of their mentor and ridiculed its materialism, but nonetheless they were drawn toward it, and the life style of the Latin American middle sectors increasingly reflected that of the United States. Together the United States and the Latin American middle sectors, evolving rapidly into a well-defined middle class, helped to shape Latin American history during the twentieth century. What were their motivations and goals? How would they influence the flow of history? THE PRESENCE OF THE UNITED STATES Foreign influence-and none more so than Great Britain's-shaped much of the historical course of Latin America during the nineteenth century. The primary challenge to British interests came from the United States, determined to spread across the North American continent and to dominate the Caribbean. By the early twentieth century, the United States had succeeded in doing both and was well on its way to replacing Britain's century-long domination of Latin America. Concerns for security and desires for trade shaped U.S. attitudes and policies toward Latin America. Obviously the United States and Latin America shared the same geography, the Western Hemisphere, thus being-in a certain romantic sense-neighbors, even though much of the United States was closer to Europe than it was to most of South America. After the bold proclamation of President Monroe in 1823, officials in Washington chose to ignore the doctrine for several decades. The British reoccupied the Falkland Islands despite. vigorous Argentine protests, the French intervened in Mexico and the Plata area, and the French and British blockaded Buenos Aires, all without the United States reminding these European interlopers of the content or intention of Monroe's statement. Only when the British and French maneuvered to thwart the union of Texas with the United States did President John Tyler invoke the principles of the doctrine in 1842 to warn the Europeans to keep out of hemispheric affairs. Indeed, as later used, the doctrine provided a handy shield for North American expansion, well underway by the mid-1840s. As President James Polk gazed westward toward California, he notified the Europeans that his country opposed any transfer of territory in the New World from one European state to another or from a nation of the Western Hemisphere to a European nation. However, by his interpretation the Monroe Doctrine did not prohibit territorial changes among the nations of this hemisphere. Such an interpretation complemented the annexation by the United States of Texas in 1845 and of Arizona, New Mexico, and California later in the decade. Expansionist sentiment rose to a fever pitch as the Stars and Stripes fluttered across the continent toward the Pacific Ocean. An editorial in the influential De Bow's Commercial Review in 1848 expressed the ebullient mood of a confident nation: The North Americans will spread out far beyond their present bounds. They will encroach again and 488 again upon their neighbors. New territories will be planted, declare their independence, and be annexed. We have New Mexico and California! We will have Old Mexico and Cuba! Such rhetoric aroused cheers in the United States. Reacting quite differently, the Latin Americans watched with apprehension the division of Mexico and debated how best to stem the expansion of the menacing "Colossus of the North." Their old fears of European intervention faded as the shadow of the United States lengthened. Great Britain served as the major check on United States expansion southward into Middle America and the Caribbean during the mid-nineteenth century, British interests in the area were considerable, United States interests were growing, and the diplomatic maneuverings between the two to protect and extend those interests intensified. The best the United States could arrange at the time was an agreement in 1850, the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, in which both nations promised not to occupy, fortify, colonize, or otherwise exercise domination over Central America. The treaty temporarily checked the territorial expansion of both nations into troubled and tempting republics that otherwise stood helpless before the two aggressive AngloSaxon powers. At about the same time the attention of the United States focused inward once again as a divided nation girded for internal strife. While civil war rent the United States, several European nations pursued their own adventures in the New World. Spain reannexed the Dominican Republic and fought Peru and Chile. France intervened in Mexico. Only after it became apparent that the North was winning the Civil War and was determined to oppose European adventures in this hemisphere did Spain depart from the Dominican Republic and return the Chincha Islands to Peru. When Napoleon II hesitated to withdraw French forces from Mexico, the government in Washington dispatched a large army to the Mexican border to help the French emperor make up his mind. Once these European threats to Latin America had ended, the United States seemed content to ignore the region-at least for the moment-while the nation concentrated its energies on reconstruction, railroad building, and industrialization. Rapid industrial growth eventually prompted United States business people and leaders to search for new markets, and none seemed more promising than Latin America, long the domain of European salespeople. One of the most remarkable secretaries of state, James G. Blaine, understanding the need for friendship and cooperation among the nations of the hemisphere, sought to stimulate more intimate commercial relations as a logical means to solidify the inter-American community. The United States had long appreciated the strategic importance of Latin America but had been slow to develop its trade relations with the huge area. During the last half of the nineteenth century, North American commerce with and investments in Latin America rose gradually. In the vigorous industrial age that had begun in the United States, Secretary of State Blaine envisioned a fraternal hemispheric trade in which the United States supplied the manufactured goods and Latin America the raw products. With such an idea in mind, he presided over the first Inter-American Conference, held m Washington in 1889-90. Although cordiality characterized the sessions, it became increasingly obvious that the Latin Americans were less interested m placing orders for the new industrial products than they were ~n containing the expansion of an ambitious neighbor by obtaining a promise of respect for the sovereignty of their nations. The times augured ill for such a promise. In fact, at that very moment, a rising tide of sentiment favoring expansion once again swept the United States. Others in the United States realized as Blaine did that Latin America contained great wealth and potential, but unlike the secretary of state they showed less subtlety in coveting it. In the eyes of many, the Latin Americans appeared too slow in fulfilling the destiny nature had charted for the area. Doubtless some "Protestant virtues and Yankee know-how" were needed to turn potential into reality-or at least 'so thought a growing number of citizens of the prospering United States, well satisfied that they had discovered the secrets of success. The Reverend Josiah Strong summed up much of the opinion of his fellow countrymen in his influential book Our Country, published in 1885, when he asked, "Having developed peculiarly aggressive traits calculated to impress its institutions upon mankind, [the United States] will spread itself over the earth. If I read not amiss, this powerful race will move down Central and South America, out upon the islands of the sea, over upon Africa and beyond. And can anyone doubt that the result of this competition of races will be the 'survival of the fittest'?". Imbued with the Spencerian and Darwinian philosophy popular at the time, the good Reverend spoke with the enthusiasm, confidence, and arrogance of his generation. Other powerful voices soon echoed his views. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge spoke of our rightful supremacy m the Western Hemisphere." Naval officer, historian, and strategist Alfred T. Mahan lobbied for a bigger and better navy. Senator Albert J. Beveridge put his faith in a still more potent force: "God has marked the American people as HIS chosen Nation to finally lead to the regeneration of the world . .. . We are trustees of the world's progress, guardians of its righteous peace." Secretary of State Richard Olney announced to the world in 1895 that the United States was supreme in the Western Hemisphere where its will would be done… Thus, by the end of the nineteenth century, government, religious, and business leaders alike spoke approvingly of expanding world markets and of a global foreign policy. Their talk soon led to action: American overseas expansion into the Pacific and the Caribbean. Significantly that expansion began after the conquest of the western 489 frontier, after several decades of impressive industrial growth, and during the economic difficulties of the 1890s. The United States challenged Spain in 1898 and easily wrested from its remaining empire the Philippine Islands, Cuba, and Puerto Rico. The quick victory marked the debut of the United States as a world power embarked upon a new international course of extra continental expansion, which one influential journalist of the day characterized admiringly as "the imperialism of liberty." Washington annexed, Puerto Rico and made Cuba a protectorate, a state of dependency that officially lasted thirty-five years. The six-week war against a once mighty Spain heightened the confidence, not to mention the feeling of superiority, of the United States. National rhetoric reflected that attitude. In his study of the relations between the United States and Latin America published in 1908, George W. Crichfield spoke pompously of the duty to impose "civilization" on the Latin Americans: "The United States is in honor bound to maintain law and in South America, and we may just as well take complete control of several of the countries, and establish decent governments while we are about it." More than half the nations, he huffed, had "sinned away their day of grace. They are semibarbarous centers of rapine.... They are a reproach to the civilization of the twentieth century." Diplomacy dictated that such ideas be expressed more subtly, but there can be no doubt that the same sentiments governed Washington's twentieth-century behavior in Latin America in the twin pursuits of trade and security. Under the influence of "Dollar Diplomacy," foreign policy pronouncements, nonetheless, could be surprisingly frank. As more and more U.S. capital entered Latin America, the U.S. government encouraged the trend and stated its determination to protect it. President William Howard Taft (1908- 12) left no doubt of where his government stood on those matters. Doubtless influenced by his experiences as the first civil governor (1901-04) of the U.S.-controlled Philippine Islands and provisional governor of Cuba (1906), he announced his foreign policy would "include active intervention to secure our merchandise and our capitalists opportunity for profitable investment." Indeed, the United States already had involved itself physically in the region that most strategically concerned it, the Caribbean and circum-Caribbean. In the period between 1898 and 1934, the United States intervened militarily in Cuba, Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Colombia, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic-, In some nations, such as Honduras, Panama, and Cuba, the interventions occurred repeatedly. In others, like Haiti, the Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua, they lasted for years, even decades. In Haiti, the marines landed in 1915 and did not depart until 1934. Tolerating no opposition, the marines fought continuously during their interventions against outraged local patriots. For example, in Haiti, Charlemagne Peralte organized 'a guerrilla army in 1917 to fight the U.S. Marines. Betrayed, he died in an ambush two years later. The newspapers in the United States invariably branded those armed opponents as "bandits." Of course viewpoints conflicted. Those termed bandits by the U.S. Army were labeled "freedom fighters" or "guerillas" by others who were bearing the brunt or feeling the humiliation of the intervention. While its interventions in Nicaragua dated back to 1849, the United States never occupied that country in the nineteenth century. Annoyed with President Jose Santos Zelaya (1893-1909), a fiery nationalist who talked of enlisting Japanese, British, and/or German help to build a canal across Nicaragua, the United States dispatched a fleet in 1909 to overthrow him. Thus began a prolonged occupation, 1909 to 1933 (with one break in 1925-26). Denouncing the seemingly endless occupation by the Yankees who "murder us in our own land," Augusto Cesar Sandino launched a rebellion on July 16, 1927: "I am accepting the invitation to combat." For five and a half years, Sandino led the fight to expel the foreign occupiers. For that challenge, the international press vilified him as a bloodthirsty bandit. His skill in harassing the marines, avoiding capture, and embarrassing the United States won the support of large numbers of Nicaraguans and the admiration of many Latin Americans. On repeated occasions, Sandino advocated changes for a "free Nicaragua": a popular, independent government, the revision of all treaties that limited Nicaragua's sovereignty, and the recovery of the nation's riches and resources for the benefit of all. He favored land reform: "I believe the state owns the land.... I favor a system of cooperatives to work the land." Nationalism propelled and shaped his struggle and the revolution it promised. To an occupied people, he was a patriot, a man who nourished their self-respect. The treacherous assassination of General Sandino opened a new chapter in Nicaraguan history that is still being written. After the U.S. Marines withdrew in January of 1933, Sandino agreed to a cease fire and signed with President Juan Bautista Sacasa a protocol of peace. The guerrilla chief swore loyalty to the president, while repeatedly warning him to beware of the new Guardia Nacional (National Guard), created, equipped, and trained by the U.S. Marines. He particularly suspected the ambitions of the Guard's commander, Anastasio Somoza. In the spring, Sandino issued a "Manifesto" declaring his moral support of President Sacasa and his intention to remain in the Segovia mountains where he would "organize agricultural cooperatives in those beautiful regions that for centuries have been ignored by the statesmen." In February 1934, Sandino returned to Managua for more talks with the government. On that occasion, General Somoza and officers of the Guardia Nacional planned the assassination of Sandino, who was seized after leaving a dinner with Sacasa and executed. Somoza 490 waited until 1936 to depose Sacasa and to establish a dynastic rule that lasted until 1979. But the ghost of Augusto Cesar Sandino did not rest. Most Nicaraguans-and many Latin Americans-accorded him a position of honor as a folk hero. From his grave he would defeat the Somozas. The rationale for U.S. interventions varied. In the cases of the Dominican Republic and Haiti, the marines landed ostensibly to forestall threatened European intervention to collect debts; in Nicaragua, the country's alleged chaotic finances partially explained the United States presence, but probably more significant was the rumor that the Nicaraguan government might sell exclusive canal rights through its territory to either Japan or Great Britain. Threats, real or imagined, against U.S. citizens or property occasioned other U.S. interventions. Nor were they limited to small republics; both Colombia and Mexico felt the weight of the "Colossus of the North." Near the turn of the century opinion in the United States favoring the construction of an interoceanic canal grew, spurred by military and commercial considerations. The first step toward the realization of a canal was to abrogate the old Clayton-Bulwer Treaty. Under international pressure, London agreed in the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty in 1901 to permit the United States to build, operate, and fortify a canal across the isthmus. Washington then proceeded to negotiate with Colombia for rights across Panama, but the Senate in Bogota balked at the terms suggested. At that point, the Panamanians seceded from Colombia and declared their independence on November 3, 1903. The Panamanians found their new sovereignty heavily compromised by the treaty signed fifteen days later by US. Secretary of State John Hay and the Frenchman Philippe Bunau-Varilla, an international adventurer who purported to represent Panama's interests. He pocketed $40 million from the United States for which no public accounting was ever given, received the Legion of Honor from the French government, and never returned to Panama. The treaty he signed in Panama's name granted the United States "in perpetuity" control of a ten-mile strip across the Isthmus with power and jurisdiction "as if it were sovereign." It was negotiated without consulting the Panamanians during those chaotic days when they were fighting physically for their independence. Work on the canal began in 1904 and terminated a decade later. Controversy over the canal and the treaty that made it possible has raged between the United States and Panama ever since. The trespassing of the North American giant on Latin American sovereignty evoked protest and aroused distrust. Many Latin American intellectuals of the period spoke out to denounce "the Yankee imperialism." Physically unable to prevent the interventions, Latin American governments sought recourse in international law. They labored long and determinedly to persuade Washington to renounce by treaty recourse to intervention. Meanwhile, the United States eclipsed Great Britain as the dominant foreign economic influence. Investments from the United States rose rapidly. By 1897, US. capital in Latin America totaled $320 million, chiefly in Mexico, Cuba, and Central America. Railroads ranked as the most important investment, followed by mining and then agriculture. In the next decade and a half investments jumped fivefold with Chile and Peru joining the Middle American nations as the chief recipients of attention. By 1929, US. citizens had invested $3.5 billion, or 4% of all overseas investments, in Latin America. Trade between the United States and Latin America increased with equal rapidity. The United States supplanted Europe in economic importance in Middle America. By 1914 the United States was purchasing 7% of Mexico's exports and supplying 5% of its neighbor's imports. By 1919 the United States consumed two-thirds of Central America's exports, while furnishing that area with threequarters of its imports. Domination of the South American markets was less complete but nonetheless very important and growing. New steamship lines and telegraph cables tightened the links between the United States and Latin America. The North Americans, who had forged particularly strong economic links with Brazil, were the 'principal customers of Brazil's three-major exports: coffee, rubber, and cocoa. Since 1865, the United States had taken the single largest share of Brazil's coffee, after 1870 buying more than half its coffee beans sold abroad. The result was that by 1912 the United States bought 3% of Brazil's exports, while the second most important market, Great Britain, purchased only 1%. Indicating the increasing importance of trade with Brazil, the National City Bank of New York in 1915 established the first two US. bank branches there. In the same year, an American Chamber of Commerce opened in Rio de Janeiro. Those growing commercial relations strengthened a diplomatic understanding and cooperation between Brazil and the United States. In 1904, the Brazilian Foreign Office classified Washington as the "number one" diplomatic post and the following year raised its legation to the rank of embassy in the North American capital, the first South American nation to do so. The United States immediately reciprocated. The United States enjoyed a friendship with the South American giant unique in the annals of hemispheric diplomacy, a counterpoint to tensions prevailing in other regions created by US. concerns for security and Latin American fears of aggression.