What are Our Nation’s Economic Goals? What kind of economic life do we want? Our nation's economic goals, as stated in the 1946 Employment Act, are full employment, economic growth, and stable prices. As we take a closer look at each goal, you will see that the goal cannot be achieved if our economy is not working well. Full Employment Most of us would like to live in a society in which everybody who wants a decent-paying job is able to find one. When that happens, we will have achieved the first goal; full employment. But full employment is not the same as no unemployment. There will always be some people seeking jobs, if only temporarily. There are always new people who are seeking to enter the labor force. Others are changing jobs for various reasons. Most economists agree that 4 or % unemployment is acceptable. Unfortunately, there have been long periods, particularly during times of recession and depression, when the rate has been much higher. Then, large numbers of workers have been unemployed for long periods of time. Economic Growth The nation's second economic goal is economic growth. Economic growth is an increase in the nation's yearly output of goods and services (its GNP). Economic growth differs from real economic growth. The latter term refers to an increase in the production of goods and services at a rate faster than population increase. Real economic growth makes it possible for everyone to have more than before. Stable Prices The nation's third economic goal is stable prices. In Chapters 6 and 29, we discussed inflation, a rise in the prices of goods and services. Inflation hurts many people. We also learned that deflation, or a continuous drop in prices, such as occurred during the Great Depression, can also hurt producers. Both inflation and deflation are undesirable. When prices remain stable, the purchasing power of the dollar is stable. This happens, for example, when $1,000 deposited in a bank will buy about as much five years later as it could have on the day it was deposited. How Are Total Spending, Employment, and Prices Kept in Balance? In the previous chapter we asked, "What causes business cycles?" Changes in spending by business, consumers, and government were given as a major reason why the economy moves up and down. The economy is rather like a pitcher being filled with water. As long as the pitcher is not full, and as more water is added, there will be more in the pitcher to drink. But once the pitcher is full, any more water that is added will overflow and be wasted. In the same way, when employment and production are below maximum, an increase in total spending - the spending by business, consumers, and government - will result in increased investment and employment, greater output, and stable prices. But, like a pitcher that is already full, when employment and production are already at maximum, an increase in total spending cannot result in greater employment or output. What does happen is that "too many dollars chase too few goods." This condition is 'a cause of inflation. Built-in Stabilizers There are a number of economic forces in our economy that act to keep total spending from rising so high that it brings on inflation, or falling so low that it brings on recession. These forces are known as builtin stabilizers. 1.Taxes. When everyone's income is rising, so too is their ability to spend. But the amount of income taxes that people pay also increases when they earn more, and this reduces the amount that they can spend. 2.Unemployment Insurance. Unemployment insurance is another built-in stabilizer. When unemployment increases, unemployment benefit payments also increase. Those 60 unemployed workers who are eligible to receive such payments now have money to spend. As a result, the level of spending will not fall as low as it would have fallen had there been no unemployment insurance. 3.Social Security. Social Security benefit payments are another form of built-in stabilizer. As unemployment increases, older workers who are eligible for Social Security benefits will retire when they are laid off their jobs. This trend opens up jobs for younger workers. Therefore, employment remains at reasonable levels. When the demand for workers increases, as it does during periods of prosperity, high wages and many available jobs induce workers to keep on working or to come out of retirement. While built-in stabilizers are a help, they alone are not enough to keep the economy healthy. When the economy is sluggish (in a period of deflation) or overheated (in a period of inflation), the federal government serves as the "mechanic" to do the needed repair work. It has two major "tools" to control the ups and downs of the economy. Monetary policy refers to programs that try to increase or decrease the level of business activity by regulating the nation's supply of money and credit. Fiscal policy refers to the power of the federal government to tax and spend in order to achieve its goals for the economy. In either case, whether it is using monetary policy or fiscal policy, the federal government is using its powers in order to influence total spending in the economy. Let us examine each policy more closely. Monetary Policy 1. During Deflation or Recession. Suppose that business has been in a slump for some time. Sales in most industries have been falling. In an effort to reduce expenses, employers have been laying off workers. Unemployment therefore is increasing, and consumer spending is declining. Sales fall to even lower levels. This prompts businesses to cut back still further and lay off even more workers. In short, real GNP growth slows, and the business cycle now moves toward recession. At this point, the Federal Reserve System (or "Fed") has decided to use its monetary powers to stop the decline. It will do this by increasing the amount of money and credit available. The Fed increases the supply of money and credit by allowing interest rates to fall and by making it easier for banks and other lenders to make loans. When this happens, firms that previously found it too costly or too difficult to borrow will now be able to do so. Lower interest rates also make it easier for consumers to buy costly items such as appliances, automobiles, and homes. The increased money supply will enable some consumers and businesses to increase their spending. Increased spending will enable some firms to increase production and hire additional workers. Then, as the newly hired workers and recently expanded businesses increase their buying, still more firms will expand and hire additional workers. With the economy expanding, the business cycle will now begin to turn upward. 2. During Inflation. Now let us suppose that the economy is facing another type of problem. Production, employment, and sales are at high levels. Spending by consumers and businesses increases. Prices rise. Rising prices lead workers to demand higher wages and businesses to demand higher prices. This situation is what economists describe as an inflationary cycle. With prices threatening to get out of hand, the Fed may decide to use its monetary powers to bring the inflation to an end. It will do this by reducing the amount of money in circulation and making it more difficult to borrow. For this purpose, the Fed will require that banks keep a larger portion of their funds on reserve, thereby leaving them with less money to lend to their customers. Less money to lend will also cause interest rates to rise. Higher interest rates make loans more costly and in that way discourage borrowing. Finally, the Fed may step up the level of government borrowing. When the government borrows, those who lend it the money (the general public) are left with less to spend. (If you are wondering how the government gets investors to lend it money, it does so by raising its interest rates.) With less money in circulation and credit more difficult and costly to obtain, spending (the demand for goods and services) will decrease. Falling demand will serve to lower prices and bring the inflation to an end. Fiscal Policy The federal government has the power to tax and spend. When it uses these powers to influence the economy, it is setting fiscal policy. We saw in Chapters 27 and 28 how much the federal government collects in taxes and how much it spends in a given year. Because the income and spending of the government are so huge, they both have great impact upon the nation's economy. For example, tax increases leave us all with less to spend. Similarly, tax reductions leave us with more. Government spending also affects our pocketbooks. When the federal government buys goods and services, payments for these purchases go directly to business firms and indirectly to their employees. The employees and the businesses, in turn, use the funds to purchase the things they want, and the money is passed on and on through the economy. When government spending is increasing, the economy as a whole has more to spend. When government spending is decreasing, incomes decline. The federal government can, and does, use its powers to tax and spend to benefit the economy. Economists call these powers the government's fiscal tools. During periods of recession, when business is in decline and unemployment is rising, the government will try to use its fiscal tools to increase total spending. It does this by increasing its spending, cutting taxes, or both. Increased spending will 61 stimulate other firms to expand their operations and hire additional workers. A tax cut will enable individuals and businesses to increase their spending and thereby promote business expansion. If, instead, the nation is in an inflationary cycle, the federal government may use its fiscal powers to reduce total spending. It can do this by cutting its spending, increasing taxes, or both. With a reduction in government spending, individuals and businesses have less to spend. Higher taxes tend to have a similar effect. With less spending, the problem of inflation will be curbed