The struggle for women’s rights is another area in which Cuba enjoys undisputed leadership in Latin
America. Although Latin American women have made definite strides in the past half century toward
emancipation from legal, economic, and political disabilities, throughout most of the continent the ideology of
machismo (the cult of male virility and superiority), with its corollaries of patriarchal rule and the double sex
standard, continues to reign. Cuba alone has taken decisive measures to end this rule. A mt1estone in this
process was the Family Code of 1976, which gave the force of law to the division of household labor. The
following excerpt describes the stages and strategies of the Cuban effort to achieve equality for women.
Isabel Larguia and John Dumoulin, "La mujer en el desarrollo: estrategia ye experiencias de la Revoluci6n
Cubana," Caso de las Americas, March-April 1985, Year 25, no. 149, pp. 37-53.
Cuba has made progress in the status of women
without precedent in Latin America, and the strategy
that made this possible is therefore worthy of study. To
give some idea of the magnitude of this progress, let us
first take as an example the index of women's
economic activity. If we compare the Cuban index
with that of the United States, we find that the change
which there took half a century was achieved in Cuba
in the nine years between 1970 and 1979. Another
example is the incorporation of women in professional
posts: in the five-year period 1975-1979 they
represented 80% of the professionals working in our
country. To be sure, we are taking these examples out
of context. To obtain a concrete idea of the strategy to
achieve women's equality in Cuba, and its results, a
complex analysis, beginning with the most general
aspects, is necessary.
Today's socialist world, with its successes and
perspectives, with all its problems, is still a young
social organism in process of growth, in which
everything has not yet settled, that still bears the
imprint of past historical epochs. This is the case with
the dynamic of the status of women under socialism
today.
The struggle for women's equality in Cuba is
conceived as inextricably linked to a general process of
social transformation, part of the socialist revolution
and the construction of a classless society. We do not
consider it possible to make substantial advances
through an isolated struggle of women and the activity
of intellectual elites.
The profound inequality of the sexes created in
conditions of backwardness and dependency is
inseparable from the imbalances and antagonisms that
governed all relations in our country, notably the
relations between the different classes, regions,
branches of activity, ethnic groups, and between the
countryside and the city. The inequality of the sexes
could only be overcome through a change that would
correct the totality of these violent contrasts and
imbalances. It was necessary to set in motion a process
that, on the economic plane, would make possible a
continuous expansion and democratization of
employment and life outside the home, that would
overcome the unequal levels of productivity, work
skills, and earnings, and would simultaneously change
the quality of ordinary people's lives and the services
available to them. In order to achieve these goals, it
was necessary to smash the structures that maintained
underdevelopment, chronic unemployment,
deformation of the productive structure, foreign
dependency, and the corresponding educational
system, the latifundist agrarian structure and, in its
most general and essential characteristics, private
ownership of the basic means of production. Thus,
only as a result of the revolution could the special
interests of women and the general interests of the
entire country be harmonized. Both required the
transformation of the fundamental structures and the
conquest of underdevelopment in a way that
corresponded to the interests of the great majority of
the population. In their general aspects, these
conditions are common to many underdeveloped
countries. In order to understand the concrete problem
of women in the Cuban Revolution, we must take
account of some specific traits that aggravated their
economic exploitation and accentuated, in particular,
the severity of the patriarchal structures to which they
were subjected. Very briefly, we shall indicate these
differentiating historical factors.
The majority of Cuban women lived in the interior
of the country. But the characteristic deformation of
the Cuban economy and the corresponding patriarchal
tradition denied them access to direct agricultural
labor, yet offered them no alternative source of
income. The immense majority of women worked fulltime in the direct reproduction of the labor force, in
their homes. Women formed only 1% of the
population that was recorded as occupied in
agriculture. They were even forbidden to work on selfsubsistence plots, and if a woman did such work
because there were no males in the family she did so
secretly, because women's labor was regarded by
society as a whole as degrading to the head of the
family. It dishonored him socially.
The fact that a peasant woman did not produce
visible commodities with her own hands contributed to
her lack of access to commercial activity. Since
domestic industry did not exist in rural Cuba, women
also lacked an artisan tradition. In contrast to rural
areas in other parts of Latin America, the Cuban
peasant woman did not make pottery, weave baskets,
produce textiles or leather goods; as a rule she did not
make any visible article of material culture that would
establish her identity as a worker.
In contrast to other areas of Latin America, women
did not participate together with men in direct
agricultural labor. With rare exceptions, the cutting of
sugar cane was exclusively male and seasonal labor.
Underemployment and unemployment were chronic. It
was unimaginable for women to work in a sugar mill,
even as a cleaning woman.
565
The lack of sources of employment for women in the
rural zones strengthened the sway of patriarchal
standards of conduct. This situation, and hunger,
spurred the migration of women toward urban areas,
where the lack of opportunity to work in industry and
services – due to the economic stagnation of the
country – channeled them into domestic work or
prostitution. According to the census of 1953, 13.7%
of all the women in the country were economically
active in that year; the figure includes seventy
thousand domestics, that is, more than a fourth; there
was a large number of official prostitutes; to these
must be added those women who worked in services
and stores and had to engage in a somewhat more
veiled prostitution to supplement their miserable
earnings.
The tobacco and clothing industries, which
employed a certain number of women, as a rule were
small, dispersed establishments that did not allow the
creation of a class-conscious female proletariat that
could influence the 86% of women who only did
housework in their own homes.
There was no electricity in the countryside; 87% of
all dwellings were lighted with oil lamps; 63% were
huts with earth floors. Forty-two percent of the
peasants were illiterate. Agricultural laborers suffered
from a food deficit of 1000 calories, with the result
that 14% had tuberculosis, 13% had typhoid, and 36%
had parasitic diseases. In these conditions of general
misery, the home was school, hospital, old people's
home, and haven for the unemployed.
The high level of male unemployment made the
possible appearance of a less skilled and cheaper labor
force seem a threat. The taboos based on the notion of
the physical and mental inferiority of women attained
their supreme expression. The invisible labor of the
housewife, her wifely and maternal obligations, were
elevated to an almost religious level. The conception
of woman as an exclusively sexual being, as a
biological being deprived of humanity was constantly
renewed by the practice of prostitution. The
combination of these adverse historical factors created
in the daily consciousness a structure of patriarchal
values that was very difficult to break up and
eliminate.
This was the situation in which the majority of the
female population of Cuba found itself on January 2,
1959.
The Strategy of Women's Liberation
In the struggle for national liberation a vanguard
group of women had arisen who together with the
revolutionary leadership understood the necessity and
the interest of women in actively participating in the
struggle that had begun for the development of our
country. They faced the difficult task of organizing a
mass of women who lacked any idea of their
fundamental rights. However, women and the
population as a whole possessed a lively and growing
consciousness of the general problems of the country
at that stage, viewed in their totality as the problem of
national liberation. In August 1960 there was founded
the Federation of Cuban Women (FCW) as a mass
women's organization in support of the revolutionary
transformation of the country. The first nuclei arose
throughout the breadth and length of the country and
grouped together the most progressive women of each
locality and a number of revolutionary ex-combatants
and militants. In focusing on the problem of women's
equality, the revolutionary leadership took as its point
of departure two basic historical regularities:
(a) It is impossible to achieve full and definitive
liberation if it is not based on the interests and
awakened consciousness of all oppressed women. This
awakened consciousness should lead to a break with
and subsequent elimination of the patriarchal ideology
inherited from previous socioeconomic formations.
(b) It is a historical regularity that the mass of
women of the most exploited sectors, in order to
become active in the public sphere, must first pass
through the development of so-called traditional tasks
before they can break into fields that had previously
been closed to them. This was the principal direction
of the initial organizing effort, although from the first a
number of women of humble origin were placed in
posts involving high skill and responsibility; both
processes took place simultaneously.
In the beginning, the most modest efforts of activists
to free women from their domestic confinement could
provoke incidents of rejection and create a climate of
confusion in the locality. The first leaders of the FCW
in the most isolated zones had to face hostility and
violent rejection by the traditional patriarchal ideology
as well as attacks by counterrevolutionaries. The first
successes in breaking with the traditions that kept
women in a cloistered life were achieved through the
most modest channels, based on values and activities
traditionally regarded as "proper for women." The first
step was to ensure that these activities should not be
engaged in for the benefit of a tyrannical head of
family but should instead serve the community. Cuban
women accepted the slogans of the revolution as their
own. They were ready to support and defend the
decisive structural transformations of the first years
without as yet questioning the traditional role of
women in society.
Pursuing the goal that women's labor should be
channeled toward the community and produce visible
objects whereby women could establish their human
identity, there arose the first gardens of the FCW,
whose products were consumed by the local branches
of the FCW. A stimulus was also given to the
development of women's crafts and to women's
participation in the construction and care of the first
childcare centers. The home began to open up toward
social life, and women imperceptibly began to direct
their activity toward the public sphere. Women's labor
power ceased to be the private property of the husband,
father, or pimp. By directing their efforts toward the
service of the collective, women began to gain a sense
of their own value and, fundamentally, of their
ownership of the products of their labor. In the
consciousness of the oppressed Cuban women began
to arise two concepts that they regarded as inseparable,
the concepts of collective and personal identity or, as
they expressed it, revolution and women's liberation.
566
This initial period of the 1960s may be difficult to
understand for those who champion women's rights
without understanding revolutionary changes in their
internal linkage. One of the most successful measures
of that period was the creation of schools that taught
girls to cut and sew, although Cuba did not then and
does not now have an industry of dressmaking for
export. These schools were given the name of Ana
Betancourt, an illustrious nineteenth century patriot
who at a very early date denounced women's
inequality. They were designed for young women,
living in the most remote areas, whose fathers not only
opposed their learning to read and write and working
for wages, but even their joining women's
organizations. The nominal purpose of these schools
was to teach young women to cut and sew, which
required them to leave their isolated farms and come to
the city. In fact, their training was complemented by a
program of general political studies, and they became
conscious agents of the profound transformations
taking place in the country. When they returned to
their homes they did so with the commitment to rescue
other young women from their patriarchal isolation,
becoming one of the channels through which the FCW
continued its campaign to liberate the most oppressed
Cuban women.
In 1961, the literacy campaign, which began a
massive process of educational advance, above all in
rural areas, brought out of their domestic isolation tens
of thousands of young women in the towns and cities
who worked for months as volunteer teachers, working
shoulder to shoulder with their male comrades and for
the first time exercising control over their own lives.
This voluntary work, a useful social activity that
supported the gains of the revolution, attracted women
because they could see their own progress reflected in
those gains. It was a means of transition, enabling
women to leave the hermetically closed home, lose
their fear of the world outside the family, and gain
confidence in themselves. It gradually prepared them
to reinforce those gains by their subsequent
incorporation in wage labor.
The struggle between the Revolution and its external
and internal enemies, a struggle decisive for the
destiny of the country, assigned an extraordinary
importance to the defense of the homeland and was
responsible for the first recruitment of a considerable
number of women in the military forces. Women and
society in general became aware of that need. Women
began to enlist in the revolutionary militias and police,
wore uniforms for the first time, and began to carry
arms. Some entered military schools and obtained
command ranks and responsibilities. Thus one of the
most formidable barriers to the elimination of division
of labor by sex was destroyed.
These initial measures, in themselves very modest,
had the great value of mobilizing millions of women
who began to destroy the very foundations of the
patriarchal structure inherited from the colonial period
and the slaveowners' hegemony, and reaffirmed by
Cuban neocolonial society. In less than three years the
prostitutes were reeducated and integrated with dignity
in social life, production, and study. The same
happened with the 70,000 domestic servants. By about
1970 the so-called "informal sector" had almost
completely disappeared. . ..
The Revolution struck a heavy blow at the
anachronistic structures that impeded national
development and opened the way for an expansion of
employment without precedent in our history. By the
mid-sixties the great mass of unemployed, whose
number a few years before had risen to 16.4% of the
labor force, had been absorbed. From that date the
expansion of the labor force would basically be
achieved by the incorporation of women in labor
outside the home. Women understood that need, and in
the course of the 1960s they joined the labor force
from primarily patriotic motives. The FCW developed
an intense activity to promote and facilitate the
incorporation of women in production.
Beginning about 1960, the number of women who
annually joined the labor force grew rapidly. But this
was accompanied by considerable instability in
women's labor, due to the lack of adequate means of
support that would take account of the magnitude of
the change with respect to traditional customs and
usages. This led to the adoption of transitional
measures designed to promote the permanence of
women in the labor force and ensure that the growth of
women's activity should not bring a breakdown of the
traditional, still functioning mechanisms with respect
to conduct, values, motives, self-images of men and
women, and of the reality of the direct reproduction of
the labor force-the domestic labor that in the decade of
the 1960s was still carried on almost exclusively by
women. . ..
The Cuban Woman and the Private Reproduction
of the Labor Force
The development and the level of equality achieved
by Cuban women have been won in the context of a
revolutionary transformation of the country, of a
struggle against underdevelopment and the
anachronistic capitalist society that supported it.
Toward the end of the first decade of the revolutionary
process, it became clear that the patriarchal family
inherited from the old society was an obstacle to
socioeconomic progress, and it joined a list of
structures whose replacement was a very early
strategic objective. We faced the task of transforming
the relations between the sexes, with a view to
establishing equality and greater freedom in the
development of the human personality.
The gradual suppression of the home viewed as a
private economic cell, as a work center devoted to the
direct reproduction of the labor force, is an irreversible
tendency of social development. But to replace the
small domestic economy with a great socialized
productive force not only requires a very high
development of the productive forces but a
concomitant technological redesigning of the human
habitat, accompanied by the creation of a
consciousness of a high social content. Such a
development on a world scale can take place only after
there is an end to the squandering of resources on
armaments.
567
Despite the poverty of our country, the FCW fought
from the first for the construction of services that could
lighten the burdens of women's second, domestic
workday. By 1981 the available services created by the
revolutionary government included 92,000 places in
childcare centers and 200,000 places in part-time
boarding schools (semiinternados), exclusively for the
children of working mothers. The number of
scholarships to boarding schools (internados) rose to
589,000. The creation of workers' and students' dining
rooms meant that the working woman did not have to
return home during her workday. The tempo of
integration of women in political and productive life
attained very rapid rhythms. But the created services,
although they represented very significant aid, could
not replace the direct reproduction of the labor force in
the home. These tasks continue to weigh on women.
The ideas of the past forbade men to perform the
slightest domestic task or to participate actively in the
care of their children. The division of labor within the
family cast-and still casts-its shadow over public life.
If a woman had to invest more than twelve hours a day
in labor between her workplace and the home, she
preferred employment where the work was lighter and
involved less responsibility than would a man, who
invested his working energies only in his workplace.
How could this problem be overcome? Customs
change slowly in a complex, contradictory process
which requires a mix of vigorous state measures with
ideological struggle and the erosion of old ways of life
under the pressure of great material changes.
By the beginning of the 1970s there was already
evident in Cuba a tendency toward the reorientation of
social life, a tendency that had been gaining ground in
the social psychology of the average Cuban, more
especially in the homes of working women. The
motives and needs of the new life, the revolutionary
activities and the ideals of social justice were little by
little making their influence felt in the home and
pushing for its reorganization. The process gained
strength in 1975 with the adoption of two measures
that both reflected this tendency and gave it new
impetus. The First Congress of the Communist Party
of Cuba held in that year approved Thesis III, "On the
Full Exercise of Women's Equality," discussed and
approved with amendments suggested by study circles
on the grass-roots level in all workplaces and labor
organizations. This thesis asserted that men should
fully share with women all domestic tasks. This
principle acquired the force of law in the Family Code
which, renovating and systematizing family law,
proclaimed shared responsibility in all domestic tasks.
Its pertinent provisions constitute the new marriage·
vow and are explained and exemplified to the pair
when they are asked if they are ready to assume this
commitment. This code was subjected to the same
process of mass discussion and approval as Thesis III.
A permanent ideological struggle is being waged in
the bosom of society in order that men should share
domestic tasks as a direct means of liberating women's
creative capacities in a historic era of transition to a
more developed society.'"
We believe that it was not pure chance that the years
1970-1971, when the great movement to incorporate
women in the labor force began, were critical both for
the growth and stability of women's employment and
for the institution of marriage. The frequency of
divorce increased very rapidly in that period, rising
from 0.4% to 2.3%. Gradually, adequate solutions for
the problems of that stage were found, however, and in
the first five years of the 1970s the rate of divorce
ceased to grow, declined a little to 1.7%, and then
stabilized, while each year a large number of married
women joined the labor force. These figures attest to
the profound restructuring of values that took place in
the social psychology of vast sections of the
population. No revolutionary change can take place
without upheavals of one or another kind, but in this
case the transient instability had a positive effect.
Whereas in 1960 a man felt dishonored if his wife
worked, today he is ashamed if she does not work and
tends to offer excuses such as: "She is sick"; "she has
nervous problems" or "she has problems"; or "she is
looking for work that suits her."
The Cuban woman, for her part, when she considers
taking a man for her husband, today asks first of all,
"Will he understand me?" meaning, will he understand
her need and right to have an active and diversified
social life and not expect to have a domestic slave,
which requires that he share the housework.
The implementation of the Family Code is the hub of
a direct and massive confrontation with the malechauvinist standards and the basis of the division of
labor between the sexes. Its objective is to liberate the
energies of women so that they may direct those
energies toward the various areas of social activity,
thereby achieving the personal self-realization that
formerly was forbidden to women.
Along with this there has taken place a
transformation of customs in the realm of sexual
relations and biological reproduction. Contraceptives
and abortion are now freely available. The birth rate,
like the infant mortality rate, has declined to levels that
are generally found only in highly developed countries.
The customs of today's young people are more
permissive than those of their parents; they have
definitively disposed of the myth of virginity. The
double sex standard has also been banished. Such
brusque changes cannot take place without producing
tensions. They require adjustments in social
consciousness. The FCW, the educational system, the
press and television are promoting sex education in the
interests of planned maternity, of avoiding hasty
marriages, and of changing the image of the single
mother in order that maternity should not interrupt
education.
The full exercise of women's equality is not yet a
perfect reality but an ideal for which a struggle is
waged in all spheres and on all levels of Cuban life, as
part of the Revolution and the national development,
as a key goal toward which much progress has been
made and toward which we continue to advance. 